


CORNELLUNTVERbi. 
LIBR/vRY 

rrBACA.M.iM.4853 



y.;--- 




Charles W. Wason Coilectioii 
on East Asia 




All books are subject to recall after two weeks 
Olln/Kroch Library 



^^w^^^ 


DATE DUE 




WS& 






























-^•^JIJhL 




f' 


























t^HMl 
















































































GAYLORD 






PRINTED IN U.S.A. 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924074502034 



One of the World's Literary Masterpieces 

IS js le 

A MISSION TO HEAVEN 

A fireat Chinese Epic and Allegory 



BY 



CH'IU CH'ANG CH'Ul^ 

A Taoist Gamaliel who became a Ncstorian Prophet and 
Advisor to the Chinese Court. 

TRANSI,ATED BY 

TIMOTHY KICHAKD 

Chancellor and Director of the Shansi GoYernment University 






PUBLISHED AT 

THE CHRISTIAN I.ITERATURE SOCIETY'S DEPOT, 

SHANGHAI 

1913 



In compliance with current 
copyright law, Cornell University 
Library produced this 
replacement volume on paper 
that meets the ANSI Standard 
Z39.48-1984 to replace the 
irreparably; deteriorated original. 

V 1994 :^ 



DEDICATION. 

To all devout and intelligent brothers and sisters 
both of the East and of the "West who endeavour to 
understand and co-operate with one another in the up- 
holding of righteousness and the suppression of ail wrong 
so that the Kingdom of God shall be established through- 
out the world this Epic and Allegory is affectionately 
dedicated. 

Timothy Richard. 
Shanghai, October, 1913. 



CONTENTS 



List of lUusiiations 

Introduction ... ._ 

CHAPTERS. 

I. Search for Immortality 

II. Monkey studies Magic 

III. Visits Dragons and Judges in H«H 

IV. Declines being a Stud Master . . 
V. Upsets the Peach Banquet 

VI. The Great Holy One captured ... 

VII. Imprisoned for 500 Years 

VTIl. Buddha provides Scriptures 

IX. Hucn Chwang's Parentage 

X. A Dragon executed 

XI. The Emperor in Hades 

XII. All Souls' Day 

XIII. The Monkey joins the Master — 

XIV. The Monkey conrerted 

XV. A Dragon becomes a Horse 

XVT. Monks steal the Master's Cassock 

XVII. KTvanyin helps Sun 

XVIII. Kao Lai Chwang Battle 

XIX. Pa Kiei converted — Heart Classic 

XX. The Master carried away 

XXI. Kwanyin delivers from False Doctrines 

XXII. The Monk Sand converted 

XXIII. Domestic and Ascetic Life 

XXIV. Sun steals Ginseng 

XXV. The Pilgrims arrested 

XXVI. Water of Life revives the Trees— 

XXVII. The Monkey dismissed 

XXVIII. The Monkey welcomed Home 

XXIX. The Master saved by a Princess 

XXX. The Dragon Horse's Intelligence •.• 



Pack 



1 

16 

27 

4G 

62 

77 

92 

105 

109 

112 

lie 

132 
137 
130 
142 
144 
146 
148 
150 
155 
1.58 
161 
163 
366 
169 
170 
172 
174 
176 
178 



CHAPTEES. 

XXXI. Eeeonciliation — Sun saves his Master 

XXXII. Pa Kiei neglects to watch 

XXXIII. Lotus Cave Demon's Magic 

XXXIY. Stm outwits the Demon ... 

XXXV. Good Overcoming Evil 

XXXVI. Eef entance gives Light ... 

XXXVII. A King's Corpse in a Well 

XXXVIII. Tfe Queen questioned 

XXXIX. Tt-rragli Dead, shall live 

XL. Tfee Bed Child 

XLI. Lea by Passion 

XLII. Converted by Kwanyin 

XLIII. Blaek Eiver Demon 

XLIV. Slow Carts' Couutiy 

XLV. Bartdhists and Taoists compete ... 

XL VI. Pei-seeution and Deliverance 

XLVH. Saving a Boy and Girl 

XL VIII. Through Snow and Ice 

XLIX. Savird by a Tortoise 

L. Safe Inside the Magic Ring 

LI. Heiiiless without the Magic Spear 

LII. Seeks lielp from Julai 

LIII. Moiier and Child Eiver 

LIV. The Country of the Amazons 

LV. She-Derii's Scorpion Sting 

LVI. WiiJaout Principle. Man is Mad ... 

LVII. The True and False Monkeys 

LVIII. Julai decides which is True 

LIX. A Volcano quenched by a Pan ... 

LX. The Ox-headed Demon 

LXI. The Magic Fan tested 

LXII. The Nine-headed Demon ... ... 

LXIII. Eig'tii«insness alone brings Prosperity 

LXIV. Thorns and Fairy Land 

LXV. A False Heaven where all seems lost 

LXVT. Mil.=l5 Po comes to the Rescue 

LXVIL Pinal Safety of Converted Souls ... 

LXVIU. Sun becomes a Doctor 



Pagi 

. 180 

. 182 

. 183 

. 187 

. 189 

. 191 

. 193 

. 195 

. 197 

. 199 

. 201 

, 203 

. 205 

, 207 

, 213 

, 218 

, 219 

, 221 

223 

, 224 

, 226 

227 

229 

231 

232 

233 

234 

239 

244 

246 

248 

251 

253 

254 

256 

259 

262 

263 



A JOURNEY TO HEAVEN 



BEING 

A CHINESE EPIC AND ALLEGORY 

DEALING WITH 

The Origin of the Univetse : The Evolotion of Monkey 
to Man: The Evolution of Man to the Inunottal: 

AND 

Revealing the Religion, Science, and Magic, 
which moulded the Life 

OF 

THE MIDDLE AGES OF CENTRAL ASIA 

And which underlie the civilization of the Far East 
to this day. 

By 

CH'IU CH'ANG CH'UN. AD, I208-I288 

Born 67 years before Dante 



Those who read the adventures in the book without 
seeing the moral purpose of each miss the chief purpose 
of the book. Those who may be disposed to criticize 
the imperfect character of the converted pilgrims, must 
remember that their character is in the process of being 
perfected by the varied discipline of life. 



Ul 



CHAPTERS. 

1>XIX. Foels the Pulse by a String ... 

LXX. Three Plagues 

LXXI. The Three Bells 

LXXII. The Lovely "Women 

LXXIII. Poisoned by Womon 

IiXXlV. The Three Demons 

IiXXV. Sun personates a Demon Soldier 

LXXVI. Riding with Eight Bearers 

LXXVII. Rumour of the Master's Death 

LXXVIII. The Doomed Children saved ••. 

LXXIX. Sun performs Kara Kiri 

LXXX. The Master beTTitched 

LXXXI. The Master resigns his Mission 

LXXXII. Hidden in a Cave 

IiXXXlII. Sun charges Prince Li with Treason 

LXXXIV. Sun shaves a whole City 

LXXXV. The Bad attack the Good 

LXXXVI. The Master's Head exposed ... 

LXXXVII. Sun calls down Rain 

LXXXVllI. Three Princes study Religion ... 

LXXXLX. False Views of Religion... 

XC. Attacks of a Nine-Headed Demon 

XCI. Feast of Lanterns and New Danger 

XCII. Sun goes to Heaven for Help ••. 

XGIII. A Witch impersonaies a Princess 

XCIV. The False Princess in Fear 

XCV. Sun restores the True Princess 

XCVL Great HospitaUty to the Pilgrims 

XCVIL Sun goes to Hades for his Host 

XCvril. The Mortal Body Cast Aside... 

XCIX. The Last Trial 

C. The Pilgrims Finished Work ... 

Index 



Page 

. 265 

. 266 

. 268 

. 270 

. 273 

. 275 

. 277 

. 279 

. 281 

. 2S5 

. 287 

. 289 

. 290 

. 292 

. 2.93 

. 300 

. 302 

- 304 
. 306 
. 309 
. 311 
. 312 
. 313 
. 315 
. 317 

- 319 
. 323 
. 325 
. 327 
. 329 
. 346 

- 350 
. 363 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 

All the illustrations, except the first, second and last, are selected from 
the 146 prepared for the Chinese edition of the book. 



Jenghiz Khan Frontispiece 

God the Eternal P- 1 

The Incarnate One 242 

Kwanyin the Holy Spirit 133 

The Celestial Emperor, Yu Ti 46 

The Queen of Heaven. Shi Wang Mu 64 

The Ancient of Days. The Founder of Taoism . . . . 87 

The Angel of the Star Venus 60 

Prince To Ta 297 

The Dragon God of Rain 112 

Yen Lo the chief judge of Hades 38 

Tang Tai Chung, Emperor of China 116 

The Master 137 

Sun the Monkey 2 

Chu Fa Kiel the Pig 148 

Sa Ho Shang, the Dandy Dolphin 162 

A Dragon transformed into a Horse 143 

Meditation, seeking Wisdom 13 

Sun escapes from the Crucible 93 

Buddha provides scriptures for the salvation of men . . 105 

Kwanj-in attends the founding of All Souls' Day • • 134 

Sun steals Ginseng 168 

Kwanyin saves the Eed Child 203 

Sun puts out fire by the Magic Fan 249 

Pa Kiel tempted at the Bathing Pool 271 

The Monkey upsets the Peach Banquet 68 

Pa Kiel clears the way through thorns 254 

Pu Hien Pusa 283 

W'en Shu Pusa 283 

Tai Ching Kung, the chief monastery in Laoshan . - 362 







•Jenghiz Khan (Prom the Historian's History'-) 
Our author was one of the Religious advisors of Kubla 
Klian, the Founder of the Mongol dynasty in China 
Jengliiz's grandson. 



INTRODUCTION 

BY TRANSLATOR 



1. The Book 

There are two books in Chinese whose titles sound 
yary much alike, viz. , the Shi Yvi Ki (HJ^fE) and the Shi 
Yeu Ki (®j^|E), but they are very different. The first 
is a genuine record of travels in Western Lands during 
the Tang dynasty by the Great Buddhist Monlc Huen 
Chwang,* \vho left Sianfu for India in A. D. 629, and 
returned to the same city in A. D. 645 after an absence 
of sixteen years. It is a record of what he saw and heard, 
and was translated, first by Julien and then by Beal 
many years ago, with valuable notes by Watters in 1904, 
and many writers have written notes on these travels. 

The other book 0j^|ii is an Epic and an Allegory, 
which I have now translated, and for which I write this 
Introduction. So far as I know it has never before 
been translated into any foreign tongue. The Master 
in the Epic is of the same name as the monk who 
travelled to India, but he started on his journey in 639, 
ten years after the other. His destination was Heaven, 
not India. 

This book is not a drama like the book of Job, but 
it introduces a number of persons who play an important 
role in life, and whose names are given at the end of 
this Introduction. 



* In Chinese -HTitten both £ K and x K aud romanized Hioiion Thsang, nuan 
Chwang. Yuen Chwang. Hiuen Tiiang. Usiian Chwang aud Hhiioii Kwan. 



vi INTRODUCTION 

This book is not an epic, like the Indian Malm- 
barata by Vyasa, or the Iliad by Homer, nor like those 
of Dante or Milton, yet it deals with the two great forces 
of good and evil, worked out in heaven, on earth and 
in hades, with the final triumph of good. 

It is not a book of travels, yet it describes a journey 
across Asia, and scenes in various continents of the then 
known world, and it describes imaginary regions in 
heaven, earth and hell, unfamiliar to us in the West. 

It is not a collection of stories like the Arabian 
Nights, or Haji Baba, though it abounds in marvellous 
adventures of gods, men and demons. 

It is not a book of Cosmogony, though it describes 
creation in seven periods, and the evolution of man from 
a monkey, who originally was born from a peach stone, 
and who eventually became one of the Great Buddhas in 
Heaven. 

It is not a book of the Forces of Nature like 
Hesiod 's Theogony, though it suggests that these forces 
are true immortals. 

It is not a book of magic, though it abounds in 
magic ways of transporting its heroes, from* one part of 
the Universe to another, on the wings of the wind, with 
the rapidity of lightning, without any accident to their 
aeroplanes. By means of their magic they can grow 
tall, to the height of a hundred thousand feet, to terrify 
anybody, or, when imprisoned in a strong castle, they 
can escape through a crack, by being able to become as 
small as a fly. The hero possesses himself of a tiny 
steel wire which he can carry in his ear, and which, 



INTRODUCTION vii 

when necessary in battle, he can magnify into a terrible 
club of enormous length and vreight which none can 
withstand. 

It is not a book of astrologj', but it brings in the 
service of the angels of some of the planets. 

It is not a Pilgrivi's Progress from the city of 
Destruction to the Celestial city, but describes the 
progress from animal life to the human and intellectual, 
and then from the selfish intellectual life to the higher 
life of consideration for others, which joins in the 
service of God and the immortals, who count a thousand 
years with men as but one daj' with them, and who 
war with evil. 

It is not a book on anthropology, or the progress 
of man in civilization, yet it traces bun from infant 
ignorance, selfishness, untruthfulness and mere animal 
existence, through the experience of varied temptations 
to power and ease, up to manliness, nobleness and 
through Divine ideals into Di'^'ine actuals. 

It is not a text-book of science, but it is a great 
collection of rare experiments in human experience on 
the working hypothesis of the wisest philosophers of the 
mediaeval East. It describes creation in seven daj's, or 
periods, or kalpas. When first written it matched in 
interest those experiments made with ether and radium 
in our days. 

The author regards whirlwinds, blizzards and 
cj'clones as the highways, or express trains, of spiritual 
forces, carrying terrible destruction to all who oppose 
them, but of unfailing help to those who are to be 
saved. 



Tiii INTRODUCTION 

It is not a book on comparative religion, but it 
contains a record of great religions, especiallj' of 
Higher Buddhism, the aim of which is to save men 
from the evils and sufiCTings in this world, and of the 
lost in hell, and it records the change of character 
experienced hy those who follow it. It is to be noted 
that each of the heroes of the story is a changed 
(converted) man, and one is a drsgon of the deep sea. 
It embodies the main teaching of Confucianism and 
Taoism, of Nestorianism in Chap. 88, though its main 
object is to magnify Higher Buddhism, the great 
Mahayana religion, a singular position when it is 
remembered that tlie author was a leading Taoist 
worthy. In Chap. 100 he even includes Mohammed and 
Brahma as among those worthy to be honoured. 

It is a record of pilgrims travelling for 14 j'ears 
without purse or scrip, in countries where, and in times 
when, hospitality was more universal than now, and 
when manj' had all things in common, whilst exclusive 
ownership) or monopoly in anything was branded as 
selfish and tyrannical. 

It is not a book on religion, written by a narrow- 
minded author who could only see good in his own 
creed, and only evil in all others. The author, Chiu 
Chang Chun, was originally a Taoist, but he represents 
the God of the Confucianists, and the God of the 
Buddhist , as well as his own, as great rulers in Heaven, 
whether as sages (Sheng), the equals of Heaven, as 
Confucianists call tliem, or genii (Shen), the recipients 
and dispensers of the elixir of immortality, and magic 
power, as the Taoists call them, or Buddhas (Fo) , the 



INTRODUCTION ix 

perfected saints, as the Buddhists call them, while the 
■wicked, whether Confucianist, Taoist or Buddhist, are 
all equally blamed, and sent to the lower regions if they 
do not conform to the righteous law of the Universe, 
which he regards as the foundation of all true religion. 

2. The Author 

According to the Imperial historj' of the Mongol 
dynasty ^^%^, Ghiu Chu Chi £15 ^ i^ was bom 
at Chi Hsia Hsien ® ff, Tengchowfu ^ ffl, Shantung, 
in 1208.* When a boy he was fond of study. At 
the age of nineteen he studied Taoist books in the 
temple at one of the Kwen Lun Mountains {% ^ jlj) of 
Lan Shan, Shantung and called himself by the name 
of Chang Chun Tze -^ ^ ^. the Permanent Youth. 
Hearing that the famous Taoist priest Wang Chin Kun 
"S. M ^> called also Chung Yang (S P), had settled in 
Ninghai ^ M in the Chuen Chin Temple -^ M M, Chiu 
went there and received instruction w^ith five others, one 
of whom was a famous woman, Sun Pu Erh 9^ ^ 
Zl. Chiu soon became Wang's favourite student. 
The last Emperors of the Kin ■^ and Southern Sung 
■^ ^ dynasties several times sent for Chiu, but he 
did not respond to their call. In 1279 the first 
Emperor of the Yuen % dynasty, Kublai, sent two 
ministers, Liu Chung Luh f i] # # and Chebur Wci^W 
to invite him to come to the court. He and 
eighteen disciples left for the court. The next year he 
arrived at the South of Liushan g \\i, and sent a 



* Some have antidated his birth hv a whole Chinese Cycle of 00 years, but 
that was obviously a mistake- 



X INTEODUCTION 

despatch before him, to thank the Emperor, and 
to advise him to stop plundering and murdering. In 
1281 the Imperial euvoj'^ came again to urge him, and 
he went as far as Wuchow S iW- It took him four 
years to go from the Kwen Lun Monastery to the Snow- 
Mountain, g llj, for he was wounded in going through 
the battlefields, had to hide himself in the rebellious 
cities, and was often short of food in the desert. The 
Emperor was greatl_y pleased when he arrived at the 
imperial court, and graciously served him with a 
feast and supplied him Avith a ver}' fine tent. At that 
time the Emperor was very busily engaged in fighting 
and waging wars with the Western countries. Chiu often 
told the Emperor, in effect, that any one who -wished 
to unify the states should not indulge himself in killing 
and plundering. When asked about the method of 
governing, he said the foundation of a government was 
to serve God and to love men. When asked about 
everlasting life, he said that to have a pure heart and 
few desires were the most important things. The 
Emperor was very much delighted and told his 
secretaries, saying: " God gives me this good teacher in 
order to revive my conscience ; therefore write down 
what he says so that I and my sons may always see 
it." The Emperor never called him by his name, 
but addressed him by the term Shin Shen (# -fllj), 
the Immortal. During this time China was griev- 
ously pillaged by Mongolian soldiers, and the basin 
of the Yellow River suffered the most. Many people 
were captured and slain. After some time Chiu 
returned to Chihli and sent his disciples by order of 



INTRODUCTION xi 

the Emperor to release those who had been taken 
prisoners, so that slaves became freemen again, and those 
■who were at the point of death were delivered. The 
number of people so released was not less than 30,000. 
"When the bank of the Tai Yi Lake ^ ?^ ?|B was broken, 
the noise was heard several miles away, and the water 
thereof flowed into the East Lake ^ ^, and the first Lake 
became dry. Not long after, the high bank of Pei Kou 
At □ also crumbled away. Upon this, Chiu felt deeply 
grieved and told his disciples: "Mountains are falling 
and lakes are drying up ! I shall go with them ! " He 
died in 1288 at the age of 80. 

3. Some Lessons op Incalculable Value 

Although the Epic is not ranked among the Sacred 
Books, yet it is full of wise maxims of religious, moral, 
political and social life that will compare well mth much 
that is best in the world to-day. 

Two lessons, one political and one religious, of 
incalculable value for the peace and prosperity of the 
modern world, are apparent from this Epic, viz: — 

( 1. ) That the tyranny of any single power, oppress- 
ing all others for its own selfish purposes, is devilish 
and intolerable. Such tyranny had to be put down by the 
co-operation of all the Chief Powers in Heaven against 
the Great Sage, the Equal of Heaven, just as on earth, 
1600 years later, the European powers combined against 
Napoleon. 

(2.) That the tyranny of any religion assuming 
that it possesses every virtue, and that it must destroy 
every other religion, is also intolerable. Peace in Heaven 



xii INTRODUCTION 

was obtained bj' the harmonj- and co-operation of the Six 
Religious Powers of the world, (see Anthem, p. 360) 
just as on earth, centuries later, peace was restored by 
the Treaty of Westphalia in the West, later still by 
the granting of religious liberty by Queen Victoria in 
India, and by the granting of religious liberty in the 
Constitution of Japan. The fundamental principles 
of Comparative Religion which recognise that true 
Religion comes not to destroy but to fulfil, that no re- 
ligion has a monopoly of all truth, and that the best 
in all religions is Divine and eternal, and must be 
honoured. For God is no respecter of persons, but in 
every nation he that feareth God and doeth righteousness 
is accepted with Him. 

By the Emperor's command, Huen Chwang is 
sent to Heaven to fetch the Sacred scriptures for the 
guidance of mankind. The remedj"^ suggested for 
the ills of the time is precisely the same as that 
suggested by Frederick Harrison last year, viz., 
better text- books for education. The Scriptures of 
Higher Buddhism were the best known to Chiu Chang 
Chun then. 

From all this it will be clear that the great Indian, 
Greek and Eiu-opean writers and scientific men, ancient 
and modern, would not be disgraced by the presence 
among them of Chiu Chang Chun, the distinguished 
author of this immortal work. When Kublai Khan, 
the founder of the Mongol dynasty in China, was selecting 
able men from all parts of Asia to help him, he sent for 
Chiu Chang Chun to advise him in government and 
religion. This was in 1279, and he has left behind him 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

this unique work on the solution of the problems of life, 
and man's relation to the hiei-ai'chies of Heaven, of Hell 
and of Earth. No modern book in the West emphasises 
the importance of character more than this does. The 
' ' Imitation of Christ ' ' has its equivalent in the 
"Imitation of Julai the True Model," referred to in the 
Epic. 

It is not without significance that, after the 
introduction of a new literature with a higher 
conception of religion and life in general, the barbaric 
wars of the Mongols gave way to a peaceful civilization. 
"What influence his religious ideas had on producing the 
great Reformer Tsongkapa of Tibet, two hundred j'ears 
later, who can tell ? 

4. Comparison with ]\1odeen Solutiojss. 

No justice can be done to this great Epic and Alle- 
gory without remembering that it contains the message 
of the Greatest Prophet of Medifeval Asia to the grandson 
of the greatest military genius the world has ever seen, 
Jenghiz Khan. Nor can justice be done to it without 
remembertng the wonderful views of the Greatest States- 
man of Asia in the 19th centurj^ and the beginning of 
the 20th, I med!n Prince Ito. One of the greatest achieve- 
ments of his life, as he told me himself in the very room 
where the Japanese Constitution was drawn up , was the 
securing of religious liberty in the Constitution by which 
the best services of each religion are secured and the 
nation protected against jealousies of different religions, 
which might develop into civil war, and the possibility of 



xiv INTKODUCTION 

national ruin. Later at a banquet in his palace at Seoul, 
shortly before his lamentable assassination, I heard him 
say that having gone round the world several times to 
find what he could get for the benefit of his country he 
had learnt three great lessons, viz : 

First, that no nation can be considered prosperous 
which did not provide for the material improvement of 
its people. 

Second, that no material prosperity could last long 
without a moral foundation. 

Third, that of all nations who had a moral founda- 
tion the strongest were those v\'ho had a religious 
backbone- 

By comparing these views of Prince Ito with those 
of Chiu Chang Chun we find that the new Anthem 
in Heaven is laid on the same broad basis of religious 
liberty, for he recognises the good in all the six 
great religions ; we find that he regards the Divine 
Powers as supreme in heaven and earth ; we find in 
all his poetry that moral character is indispensa- 
ble ; and we find that every one of the pilgrims is a 
converted person who has repented of his e\i\ ways and 
pledges himself to co-operate for the salvation of the 
world. But in Prince Ilo's lesson about the necessity of 
improving the material condition of the people not bj'- 
mere doles of charity, as was the early and mediaeval 
practice in Europe and Asia, but by educational, economic 
and indxbsirinl improvements ; we find a change and an 
advance as stupendous in religion as steam, electricity 
and petrol in the means of communciation. In a word 
it makes a new heaven and a new earth for the people. 



INTEODUCTION xv 

Still the Kingdom of God cannot be established on 
earth till two other conditions are also fulfilled, viz: 

1. The federation of the whole world with Home Rule 
in each country, with one universal armj'^ and navy 
to police the world ; half the standing armies of the 
world being disbanded. 

2. The co-operation of the devout and intelligent in 
each of the great religions of the world for the im- 
provement of the world in all material, social, 
intellectual, moral and spiritual departments. 

In this way we see the great progress made since 
the great mediaeval Prophet of Asia and what yet 
remains to be done before our Lord's great prayer that 
God's will be done on earth as it is in Heaven is 
realized. 

5. Some Charactekistics op the Book 

The book is about double the size of the New 
Testament. It is like Shakespeare's works, a vast 
storehouse from which many of the theatres draw their 
most popular plays to-day, having had nothing that 
surpasses them during the last 700 years. 

The brief Chapter headings I have made myself. 
But the couplet in black type, at the beginning of each 
chapter, is by the Author of the Epic, parity indicating 
the subject and partly giving an oracular explanation so 
as to be capable of different renderings to satisfy different 
minds. 

The first seven chapters I have translated pretty 
fully; many parts of them in extenso. From the 8th 



xvi INTEODUCTION 

to the 97th I have only given an outline of the chapters, 
except Chapter XI, which describes Hell, and which I have 
translated very fully for comparison with AVestern concep- 
tions of Hell. The 98th, 99th and 100th chapters I 
have almost translated in full, as they give the conclusion 
of the whole story about leaving Earth and entering 
Heaven with such detail as no outline could do justice 
to. They will, at the same time, correct many popular 
partial views of Buddhism, which exist in Europe and 
America in these days, and which for the most part 
only deal with Primitive Buddhism. To hold these 
incomplete views is as strange as to studj- in these daj's 
the beginnings of science, as seen in astrology, alchemy 
and geomancy in preference to the discoveries of modern 
science. This Epic deals with Higher Buddhism, the 
Mahayana religion into which Primitive Buddhism 
developed and which Edwin Arnold mostly described 
in his Light of Asia. Both the Light of Asia and 
this Epic deserve careful study and attention on this 
account. 

It is worthy of special note that in the whole -Epic, 
from beginning to end, there is not one word in praise of 
the doctrine of Nirvana, or extinction, so common in 
Primitive Buddhism in harmonj' with its condemnation 
of all natural reproduction , but there is a distinct con- 
demnation of it. (See Chap. 64.) Still, in the list of 
sacred books presented to the Pilgrims there are man}-^ 
on Nirvana as the Eternal State, similar to the underly- 
ing idea in Baxter's Saints' Everlasting Rest. 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

6. Attitude of the Author Towards Christianity, 
THE Great Religion 

Before discussing what is this Great Religion 
which is the subject of this Masterpiece, it should be 
remembered that about 100 A.D. there lived a man 
named Ashvagosha in the court of Kanishka, who 
wrote a remarkable book, The Awakening of Faith in the 
Great Religion, which was translated into Chinese. This 
book was the beginning of what is called Higher 
Buddhism, different altogether from Buddhism proper, 
though news of the higher religion had reached 
China earlier through Chinese generals who had 
travelled in Central Asia. Shortly after, there was tran- 
slated into Chinese the Lotus Scripture. These two 
books, like the Epistles of Paul and the Gospel of John, 
became the chief religious food of countless followers. 
They are both ti-anslated in the New Testament of Higher 
Buddhism (T. & T. Clark, Edinburgh.) While the 
Christian Gospel, spread in Europe, the Gospel contained 
in these books spread simultaneously in Asia. AVhen 
Nestorianism organized Christian work in Asia there 
was already a broad foundation laid for it in Higher 
Buddhism, and this Great Religion practically con- 
quered all the Far East. See details of this in the 
two marvellous centuries described in, what Prof. Sayce 
characterises as epoch-making book, Wmld Healers, 
or the Lotus Gospel, b}' E. A. G., and the illuminating 
map which accompanies it. 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

Given these f uudamental facts in reading this Epic 
and AUegoiy, one's suspicion was aroused that the 
book was Christian by the description of creation in 
seven daj-s, by the distinct avowal that it taught 
personal immortality, that it did not believe in the 
Nirvana of personal annihilation, that it did not believe 
in Primitive Buddhism or Buddhism proper which is 
atheistic, that it did believe in God and His Incarnate 
One as the true Model for men to copj"^, that it taught 
that the H0I5' Spirit was in every instance the chief 
agent in producing conversion, and that praj'er was the 
source of power page 310. I was then convinced that it 
was unmistakably Christian. On page 309 I read that it 
was called the Nestorian Religion. 

Remembering that the author is considered b}' all 
Chinese scholars as the Greatest Taoist saint of his day, 
he must have been, like Paul, a converted Christian 
when he wrote this book, not a disciple of Gamaliel, 
but a verj' Gamaliel himself converted. Nor is this all; 
the Master in the story who is constantly referred to as a 
Buddhist priest is said on page 359 to have also been 
converted from his Primitive Buddhism into the Higher 
Buddhism, which is alreadj' demonstrated to have been 
Christian. Here we have one of the most romantic 
histories of the rise of Christianity in the midst of the 
Buddhists. By proper approach to these sheep of the 
other flock we are persuaded that Conversion by the 
Million is perfectly feasible.* What is wanted is fuller 
understanding of these great religious movements, a 
sympathetic co-operation with their highest aspirations, 

• See the Translator's book, Conversum bi, the Million. 



INTRODUCTION xix 

which are avowedly the same as ours, and then the 
establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth will 
have a far greater opportunity of becoming an 
accomplished fact than ever before . 

Having now discovered the Great Religion of Pre- 
Nestorian and Post-Nestorian times the next question 
which naturall}' arises is why do we not hear more of 
this religion now. The answer is very simple; instead 
of the study of universal religion a monopoly of 
religion has been given to one religion with the same 
result as in Islam, in Roman Catholicism, in the Greek 
Orthodox church and in Protestant Christianity — ^the 
narrowness and arrogance of the dominant religion 
and the oppression and starvation of all the rest. 
From the beginning of the Ming dynasty, A. D. 1368, 
to the present time, a period of over five hundred j'ears, 
the only religion patronised by the state has been 
Confucianism, and all the fat posts of the government 
were given to its followers while Buddhists, Taoists 
and Christians in China and Korea have not only 
been starved in their education but have also been 
persecuted without mercy.* 

But .Japan has been an exception, and the result is 
that the Buddhists there held their own along with 
Conf ucianists till .Japan went in for Western civilization 
as containing something more valuable than they had. 

This rapid glance at the Epic and. its attempt to 
solve the problems of life for the universal sway of 
the Mongols, brings us to the threshold of a far 



* See De Groot's Sectarianism and Beligious Persecaion in Clana- Also Timot hy 
Richard's Anti-foreign Riots in China' 



XX INTRODUCTION 

greater era when not onlj' Asia but the whole world by- 
steam and electricity' and petrol has become one 
commonwealth full of disorders in Europe, Asia, 
Africa and America. To secure permanent peace and 
progress it is not enough to have unparalleled 
armaments to fight each other, we must have also 
world federation, unprecedented parhaments to legis- 
late just laM-s for all classes, and one great modern 
religion on which to build universal contentment in 
love of God and man. The Christian religion has 
pointed out that the establishment of the Kingdom of 
God on earth is the great need. Jesus Christ said 
He had not come to destroy but to fulfil. The Holy 
Spirit is he that inspires the best men of all creeds to 
sympathize with one another and co-operate for the 
salvation of the whole world. For this end the studj* 
of the underhdng principles of this Great Epic and 
Allegorj'' will furnish valuable food for thought on the 
greatest problems before us to-daj\ 

It is not Confucianism nor Taoism nor Primitive 
Buddhism that is advocated in the Epic, but something 
superior to all three, which, though vibrating between 
them yet truh^ points to the best in all, as to a pole star, 
and which, notwithstanding many imperfections, has 
wonderfully guided the millions of China, Korea and 
Japan across the sea of life, so that it could stand com- 
parison with the best in the West till the 19th century. 

The Epic assumes most clearly some of the early 
fundamentals of the Great Religion (Mahayana Chris- 
tianity) in pre-Nestorian and post-Nestorian times, such 
as: — 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

(1) God as man's perfect model, Chen Jii. 

(2) Clirist as God incarnate, putting an end to 
death and transgression, and opening the way direct to 
immortality and Heaven, ■without a series of incarnations. 

(3) The Holy Spirit as the chief agent in repentance 
and the new birth, inspiring men to follow God in works 
of merc3^ 

Though we naturally do not find the later develop- 
ment of Christianity in the West, in regard to sin and 
atonement, brought to such prominence bj' Augustine 
and his followers, still the value of faith in the grace 
and help of God taught in this book is scarcely 
surpassed by Augustine or even Luther. Thus the 
Epic bridges over the great chasm of time with two 
great spans or arches of a thousand years each, viz., 
from Christ to the end of the Tang dynasty under the 
Nestorian patriarchs of Antioch and Babylon, and from 
the renaissance of Higher Buddhism under the Tang 
dj'nasty to the piesent time, when literary investigation 
discloses the same ancient foundations under both 
arches. 

7. Tee Diffekekce between the Hinayana 

AND MaHAYANA 

In the end, owing to the hazy views on Buddhism 
current in the "West, one is compelled seriously to ask, 
What is real Buddhism? Ask a man from Burma, 
or Ceylon, or Siam, and you find that what he describes 
is mainly Hinayana Buddhism., believed in by only 
some tens of millions. Ask a man from China or Japan, 
and he will tell you that what is believed by nearly two 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

hundred millions is mainly Mahayana Buddhism, and 
some blend also of both the Hinayana and Mahayana, 
which some leading Buddhists confess are utterly irre- 
concilable. Some writers on Buddhism often speak of the 
Hinayana, the Primitive Buddhism of a few followers, 
as a more pure form than that of the many which seems 
also very strange. Is primitive science purer than the 
modern, and is the belief of the minority of greater 
importance than that of the great majority? It is 
necessarj- to know the true character and extent of 
both. Enlightened Christians can alone help here. 

8. A Key to Unlock Difficult Terms 

The supreme importance of the book, A^ualcening 
of Faith (Ki Shin Lun) , as the beginning of the teaching 
of the INIahayana Religion, is acknowledged by all Bud- 
dhists in the Far East. It was written about the end 
of the first century of the Christian era and later 
translated into Chinese. But the true meaning of the 
central philosophic and religious term, Chen Ju ^-^ 
in it was not known to Europeans till 1907. As the 
discovery of the Eosetta stone gave the key to Egyptian 
literatures, so the discovery of the definition of this term 
in the book Wan Fa Kuei Shin Luh ^ -^^ |§ ;£» #^ gave 
the key to the central idea of Higher Buddhism, the 
Mahaj'ana religion, by explaining the term Chen Ju 
as meaning God, the Creator, the True Model. From 
this followed logically the true rendering of ^n 3j£ Julai 
as the Model Come or the Incarnate one. 

Fascinating as have been the discoveries made by 
excavations in Egypt, in Babylon, in Yucatan, and 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

later in Khotan, Central Asia, and elsewhere by noted 
archaeologists, is not this one of the greatest of all ? 
Does not this religion reveal a foundation deep enough 
to embrace the whole earth in one truly Catholic bond of 
peace and good-will ? 

Finally, the chief teaching of this great Epic and 
Allegory may be summed up in two grand ideas: — 

A. — The highest Creed of Asia,. mz., 

Man's refuge or belief 
In Grod, Namo Fo, 
In the Laws of God, Namo Fa, 
In the Teachers of those Laws, Namo Sfeng. 

B. — The highest ideal of man to be Godlike, 

copying the True Model, as did the Incarnate One. 

By clearly grasping the truths of the Mahayana re- 
ligion, and hy rej ecting the atheistic doctrines, and those of 
rebirth taught by the Hinayana or Primitive Buddhism, 
one may get into touch with the noblest spirits of modern 
Buddhism, and bj' securing their co-operation, win over 
the sympathies of nearly two hundred millions — ^a 
stupendous factor in the spiritual uplift of the human 
race. 

9. Parallelism of Religious Development 
IN THE East and West 

There is a remarkable parallelism between the 
development of Christianity in the West and Higher 
Buddhism in the East. 

There were miracle plays extensively' performed in 
the Christian Church in mediseval times, and some of 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

the miracle plays of the Buddhists are among the 
most popular to-day. (See the "Peach Banquet" 
described in Two Years in the Forbidden City.) 

The universal political power exerted by the Popes 
in mediEeval times, in organising the Crusades and other 
movements, is paralleled by the power of the Abbots at 
Hieishan near Kioto. Hideyoshi, the Japanese Napoleon, 
sent his two chief generals, one Buddhist and one 
Christian, to unite their forces for the conquest of Korea 
and China, a movement similar to the Crusades. Both 
these ambitious schemes on a gigantic scale were doomed 
to miserable failure. 

Again, the finest works of art in Eirrope, as 
are seen in- architecture, in sculpture and in painting, 
were the results of the fostering care of the Catholic 
Church, and the same is equally true of Higher 
Buddhism in Japan to this day, and is abundantly 
manifest in that superb Japanese art publication, the 
Kokka. 

The same parallelism is seen in the development of 
religious schools and sects. While the West produced 
its Franciscan, Dominican, Augustinian and Jesuit 
orders, and its modern branches of Reformed Lutheran, 
Episcopal and Nonconformist sects, the Higher 
Buddhism of Japan has developed its tM^elve modern 
sects which are flourishing to-day. 

The book ends in a sj-stem of rewards similar to 
the canonization of eminent religious men in the 
Semitic religions. In Central and Eastern Asia too, 
was developed the same kind of canonization into 
Boddhisattvas and Buddhas — different terms for the 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

same idea of Saints divinely guided. (See details in 
Chap. 100). The Emperors of China, who for the 
most part were 'Confucianists, conferred honours on 
eminent Confucian statesmen after their death. 

Thus, as in the same latitudes East and West, the 
same kinds of vegetable and animal life are produced, 
we find the same latitudes producing similar intellectual 
and religious life. Future investigation -^vill show how 
much related they may be historically. 

10. CoMPAEATIVE LiSTS OP S ACRED BoOKS PROFESSING 
TO BE DERIVED FROM HeAVEN 

In considering the object of the Mission to Heaven 
it is important to compare the Lists of Sacred Books of 
different Religions. 

1. Confucian. — The Book of Changes, I King, is supposed 

to be the most sacred. The Four Books 
and Five Classics are supposed to have 
been written by Sages who were inspired 
of God from the beginning of the Chow 
dynasty, about B. C. 1,000 to the time of 
the death of Mencius, B. C. 290. 

2. Hindu. — The three Vedas, 

Rigveda (Hymns) 

Samaveda (Chants) 

Yajurveda (Sacrificial formulas) , 

are all supposed to be " inspired. " Dates 

unknown, but probably from about 

1,000 B.C. 

3. The Buddhist Sacred Books given in this Epic are 

35 works in 5,048 books. Bunyiu Nan- 



XXVI 



INTRODUCTION 



jio's Catalogue of the Tripitaka, published 
in 1883, gives 1,279 works of Foreign 
Origin and 194 of Chinese Origin. 

4. The Taoist Sacred Books given by Dr. L. Wieger, 

S. J., in his Catalogue of Taoist books, pu- 
blished in 1911, enumerates 1,464 books, 
tracts and commentaries which is but a 
fraction compared with the voluminous 
Buddhist literature. Taoism plagiarized 
from Buddhism. It divides its Sacred 
books into Hinayana and Mahayana 
without the Buddhist justification for it 
unless the works of Lii Tsu may be 
considered Higher Taoism. It has 
forged a Lotus Scripture after one of 
the most popular of the Buddhist books, 
but it has not the magic power of 
the genuine one. Its chief books are: 
Lao Tsze's Tao Teh King, Hwang Ting, 
Kan Ying Pien, Chwang Tsze's Nan Hwa 
King, Tsan Tung Ki, Yin Fu King, 
Wu Chin Pien, Charms, Alchemy, etc. 
Lao Tsze was a contemporary of Confucius 
and Chwang Tsze was a contemporary of 
Mencius, the 6th and 3rd Century B. C. 
But Taoist writers have added, though but 
little, to their literature in every dynasty 
since then down to the present 

5. The Christian Sacred Book is the Bible, not counting 

the Apocrypha, though some do. The Old 
Testament has 39 books. New Testament 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

27 ; in all 66 Books, the time when these 
books were written ranges from Moses, 
about B.C. 1250 to St. John, about 
A.D. 95. 
6. The Mohammedan Sacred Book is the Koran in 114 
chapters or books. These were put to- 
gether between A.D. 622—651. 

11. The Tkansformation op Character 

Of all the wonders related in the Epic the most 
extraordinary and outstanding one is the transformation 
of-eharacter from very unpromising materials into saints 
fit for Heaven. The Monkey s ambition, the Pig's love 
of ease, the Sa Seng's self -righteousness, the Horse's one 
talent of being able to carry a burden, — all made willing, 
in spite of backslidings, to co-operate with the Master who 
demonstrated his high purpose by voluntarily leaving 
the joys of heaven, and coming down to earth to work for 
the salvation of men. The example of the Master was 
the moral and spiritual mainspring which Kwanyin used 
to convert them all, and deliver them from their respective 
and deserved punishments. They not only v,'ere de- 
livered from punishment, but each one also made a 
solemn vow to help in the salvation of others. Here 
we reach the profoundest mystery of the greatest religion. 

The glory of Christianity is that it makes those who 
deserve hell fit saints for Heaven. Christianity abounds 
with examples of this kind. 

Huxley was a despairing pessimist when he looked 
to man only. He desired to see all men wiped out of 
existence so as to escape suffering. It is only when we 



xxviii INTEODUCTION 

have the mind which was in Christ Jesus for the redemp- 
tion of man that optimism, like a glorious sun, rises on 
the dark world. 

In this waj^ the religion of this marvellous Epic was 
made the hope of the countless millions of Asia— the other 
sheep, not of the Western fold, which our Lord was going 
to make into one fold with one shepherd. John 10. 16. 

The beginning of this union of the Eastern and 
Western sheep in one fold we now see with our own eyes 
— a great mj^sterj' of the past now revealed in these latter 
days to the glory of God. Christ's followers have not 
come to destroy, but to fulfil. All this is wonderful in 
our sight, the glory of God alone. 

12. MOEAL AND RkLIGIOCS PRINCIPLES MUST 

CONTKOL Economics 

The gigantic problem which the great mediaeval 
Prophet of China set before himself and Kublai Khan 
was the same as that which the Prophets of Israel set 
before themseh'es, the same as that which the ancient 
Prophets of China, India, Arabia had before them 
aiid the modern saints of Christendom who founded 
Missionarj' Societies, from the days of Raymond LuUy 
and Las Casas till Edward Irving, General Booth 
and Hudson Taylor, the .same as faced the men of 
God who were the statesmen of Europe and America — 
Grotius, Sully, Stein, Mazziui, Washington and the 
Japanese Genro latterly led bj- Prince Ito, together with 
the Chinese Reformers of 1895-8. It is the question 
how to save the people, the nations and the world. 
All agreed that Sacred Books were necessary. To-day 



INTRODUCTION 



XXIX 



also, Prophets are agreed that most of the fuDdamental 
principles of ancient civilization were wonderfully 
sound. Still, the conclusions of recent international 
congresses show that modifications of the economic, and 
educational as well as the moral and religious bases of 
universal peace, progress and prosperity- are necessary. 
Let us trust in Him who made all things well to inspire 
modern Prophets to solve the modern problem. Blessed 
are they who hear God's call to save the whole world and 
obey ! 

13. Better Understanding with Better 
Knowledge 

At the first contact of Eastern and AVesteru religion 
and civilization there was a terrible clash of aims, each 
denouncing the other as false and wicked, aud of the' 
devil. But, after a century of intercourse between the . 
most intelligent and best of both in the East and "West, 
the opposition is fast passing away. The East appreciates 
famine relief work, hospital work, educational, religious 
and other beneficent work in which people from the West 
have been engaged, and no longer opposes and hates, 
but is willing to co-operate with the intelligent and 
best from the West. 

On the other hand, the ^^'estern students of the 
religions and civilizations of China and Jap^an have 
come to realize that, though these differ much from the 
forms in use in the West, yet they are not essentially 
antagonistic: therefore in order to benefit by mutual 
intercourse, the West is also anxious to co-operate with 
the intelligent and best in the East. 



XXX INTRODUCTION 

This new attitude between the East and the West, in 
which rulers, statesmen, students, priests, and common 
people begin to take part in spite of wars and revolution, 
is like the dawn of a new era of universal peace and 
good-will and love to God and man, and promises to be 
the adamantine bond between them, which all the powers 
of evil cannot sever. 

In this Epic and Allegory we see before us a religion 
which has conquered Asia, just as Christianity in ancient 
days conquered N. Africa and Europe, a religion which 
appointed its metropolitans and bishops for centuries in 
Persia, India, and China, a religion which, though 
adopting many terms which are Confucian, Taoist and 
Buddhist, still asserts itself superior to all, and which, 
though persecuted bj' inquisitions more terrible than those 
of Rome,^ retained such vitality that no power in China, 
Korea or Japan for 1,300 years has been able to stamp 
out. This pre-Nestorian religion, which had as its 
missionary a white-faced Aryan, a Parthian Prince,^ not 
a Hindu, and which Pope Calixtus declared to be Chris- 
tian, still declares itself, in spite of its Buddhist nomen- 
clature, the Mahayana or the Great Other rehgion ( Pie 
Kiao) higher than all others. It preaches the necessity 
of faith as well as works, and teaches that the entrance to 
this religion is by repentance and service. Its aim is to 
be perfect like God, the True Model, according to the 
teaching of its Messiah, who is the Incarnate One, co- 
working with the Divine Spirit that inspires men and 

1. See Sectarianism and Religious Persecution in China, by De 

Groot, and Anti-Foreign Riots in China. 

2. See Wheat among the Tares, by Arthur Lloyd. 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

women, to save men from all suffering for all time and 
ages. Its chief Scripture ^ |^ M teaches life, light 
and love, and one of its great rites is similar to the 
Holy Communion. There exists the Kin Tan Kiao 
(Religion of the Pill of Immortality). One of its 
Abbots, Pradjna by name, co-operated with the 
Nestorian Bishop King Tsing in the translation of Reli- 
gious books during the Tang dynasty. In examining this 
religion, are we not driven to ask again, what I asked 
more than twenty years ago — can this, the white-robed, 
wonderful, all-pervading religion of high Asia, the deity 
of which the Manchus forbade to be made with a white 
face, as was the image originally fashioned in the temple 
of Lii Tsu MIP^, and whose followers were compelled to 
become barbers, so that like actors they were forbidden to 
compete in the government examinations, being consider- 
ed a degraded class of people, — can this be any other than 
our long lost persecuted sister, whose Churches, presided 
over by Prester John, were found everywhere bj' Marco 
Polo in his travels, alongside of the temples of the Moslems 
and idolators, namelj'^, the Holy Catholic Church of Asia, 
the pre-Nestorian and post-Nestorian Mahayana? 

14. Lost Nestoeianism Rediscoveked 

What became of Nestorianism is another ques- 
tion of importance studied by the Roman Catholic mis- 
sionarecs for three hundred j'ears and more, and the 
great Abb6 Hue, ^vhose History- of Christianitj^ in China 
is a standard work of immense value, was not able to 
answer it; nor have any of the Protestant missionaries, 
who have been here for over a century, been able to 



xxxii INTRODUCTION 

answer it, though they have repeatedly come across what 
appeared to be valuable trails of it. Here in this 
Allegory we have at last a most momentous discovery. 
Though the question of the origin of the Mahayana 
religion is not discussed, it unmistakably says in Chap. 
88 that the Mahayana religion, which these Pilgrims 
believed in as from Heaven, is the same as the Nestorian, 
therefore the Christian, religion ! Observe carefully the 
description and meaning of prayer viz. to get power from 
on high p. 310. The Epic is not a Bible of Nestorianism 
but the Pilgrim's Progress of it. 

The author, Chiu Chang Chuu, is referred to by 
all Chinese as a great 7hoist monk and has most curious- 
ly written the best apology in existence for Higher Bud- 
dhism, just as Lii Tsu, a Confucian scholar, in his later 
years, wrote the best apology for Higher Taoism. The 
writing of this Epic and Allegory proves that he had 
been in his later years converted to Nestorianism as a 
form of Higher Buddhism. 

By these two discoveries, of Higher Buddhism being 
the same as early Christianity, and, that by Higher Bud- 
dhism the author included Nestorianism, we -are within 
reach of means of winning over more than two hundred 
millions of Higher Buddhists and Taoists to co-operate 
in the salvation of the whole world. 

15. Religious Co-opkration ixsTE.'iD 
OF Persecution 

It is worthy of note that when the Author was 
invited to the Mongol Court, the Saracens were pushing 
their conquests in Europe and the Christians were or- 



INTRODUCTION xxxiii 

ganizing the Crusades to oppose them ; and that when 
both these religions made the utmost use of their swords 
as powerful arguments to compel their opponents' 
conversion (for persecutions were the common methods of 
that age) , our Author the Nestorian Prophet towers high 
above them all in that he consistently forbade killing 
and wrote that celestial anthem in praise of the aim 
of all the founders of the great religions. 

It has been asked, since Nestorian Churches were to 
be found in thousands over the whole Chinese Empire 
and central Asia, how was it that Christianity failed 
to make greater progress after the reinforcement of 
missionaries from Kome after the Crusades ? Was it 
because Rome claimed a monopoly of Divine inspiration, 
which she denied to the followers of Nestorius, who 
from Antioch converted nearly the whole o Asia at 
that time ? 

Have not the claim of being the only true and 
Catholic religion, and the forbidding of all its followers to 
worship with or marry any Christians who do not obey 
Rome, been the great stumbling block and offence 
to the conscience of Asiatic nations and even to half 
Christendom ? 

Was it because Antioch also had neglected to 
grmu in knowledge ? Japan now is learning this lesson, 
that God has made ample provision for the material as 
well as for the spiritual need of man. 

Had not Rome forgotten to practise the love of the 
13th chapter of 1st Corinthians and 17th of John? 
Had not Antioch also forgotten to expect the fulfilment 
of the Gospel promise of a hundred fold in tliis life ? 



XX XIV 



INTRODUCTION 



Pope Calixtus said the Higher Buddhism was 
Christian, hence its great success in high Asia. Francis 
Xavier by acknowledging the same in Japan suceeded in 
converting manj' Daimios in a very few years. 

J 6 Chief Characters in the Allegory, Emblems, 
Symbols and Important Terms. 



Both Shang Ti and Tien are Confucian names 
for God. 

Yii Ti is the name given by Taoists to the Supreme 
God of the Universe. 

Tai Shang Lao Kun. Lao Kun is a name by 
which Lao Tsze is sometimes called, and as Lao Tsze 
is said to have been born vnth white hair, indicating 
his vdsdom, and it was his eighty-first appearance on 
earth to save men. We should bear in mind that 
81 is a Taoist perfect number. As our Bible says God 
appeared to Adam, Noah, Abraham, Ezekiel and others 
and spoke of twenty-four elders in Heaven, the Taoists 
regard Tai Shang as the highest and Lao Kun the 
oldest of the Heavenly Princes, therefore the nearest 
^ord in English to convey the same idea seems to be the 
Ancient of Days. The same idea of heavenly beings 
coming down to earth is seen in Buddhism, e.g. the life 
of Huen Chwang. (See page 359) . 

SM Wang Mu. The Queen of Heaven. Accord- 
ing to Taoist tradition, she was one of the most ancient 
and illustrious sovereigns of Heaven, and had the power 
to confer immortality on her guests. She banquetted 



INTRODUCTION xxxv 

them at stated periods. In one of the Chinese histories 
it is stated that about the beginning of the Christian era, 
a rumour spread abroad that Shi Wang Mu was about to 
come down from Heaven to visit the Kwen Lun. mount- 
ains. The people from North-Eastern China rose like a 
swarm of bees and rushed westward, leaving their crops 
standing in the fields. 

Fo. The Supreme God of the Buddhists. As 
the highest philosophic conception of the Absolute 
Being. He is also called the True Model {Cheu 
Ju) , Creator and Ideal. In Higher Buddhism He is 
supreme in Paradise (Western Heaven), and is called 
Amitabha (Omito Fo), explained in Chinese as the 
Buddha of Endless Age (Wu Liang Show Fo), and 
also the Buddha of Light. The Chinese character 
Fo (^) is composed of two others, meaning — 'not' and 
man,' i.e. God, whose acceptable religion is godliness, 
( Godlike ness ) . Whatever the conventional religious 
name may be, Buddhist authors and translators made the 
mistake of using the same character Fo for God and for 
Prince Gautama Buddha, the founder of Indian Primitive 
Buddhism. This mistake has created interminable con- 
fusion, which has continued to the present time, and is 
only now being disentangled by advanced students. 
Whether the word Fo is to be translated God or Gautama 
has always to be decided by the context. 
(See Chap. 98, Juki's address to the ambassador.) 

Julai. (The Model Come). The Buddha (God) In- 
carnate, the actual ideal on earth, often used wrongly as 
synonymous with Buddha, just as Christ is often wronglj^ 
used for God. He is also called the Mighty One (Ta 



XXXV 1 



INTRODUCTION 



Shih Tsze) (Japanese — Dai Seishi), who put an end to 
death, therefore an end to the possibilitj' of reincarnation 
taught by Primitive Buddhism, and ascended to Heaven to 
sit on the right hand of God. He is also called Mileh Fo, 
in Japanese Miroku, and the Great Physician , Japanese 
Yakushi. Some say the Great Daibutsu at Kamakura 
represents Julai. He is always represented in the teni 
pies of the Pui-e I.and sect on the right hand of God 
( Amitabha ) . 

Kwanyin. The luspirer to good works and mercj', 
the Buddhist equivalent to the Holy Spirit, to whom is 
attributed the work of conversion. She is always 
represented on the left of Amitabha, when one of the 
Trinity, but alone and behind the Trinity screen when 
saving some one from a sea of trouble. 

Huen Chwang. A religious Mast«r with a vow 
of faith in, and loyalty' to, Buddha " God ", to help and 
save all living beings, by doing good to them, and by 
self-sacrifice. He is sent by the Chinese Emperor as an 
ambassador to procure Scriptures from Heaven. He 
has come down from Heaven, like the Angel of the 
Covenant in the Bible, for the tenth time to save men. 
His former disembodied spirit's name was Kin Shen -^feSf. 
(Golden Cicada) . He seems to have belonged to Pri- 
mitive Buddhism originally and despised the Higher, 
as Paul did the Christian, but was afterwards convert.ed 
and became a leader in the Higher. (Seep. 359). He 
is called for his work by Kwanyin. Chap. 12. 

Sun Wu Kung. A monkey who personates the 
irrepressible human mind, the discoverer, the inventive 
genius, full of resource, who begins with monkey 



INTEODUCTION xxxvii 

inqujsitiveness to study the reason of things, a man of 
science, who independently becomes a mighty chief, is 
unruly in heaven, and is imprisoned for 500 years. 
Later he is converted by Kwanyin, and follows the 
religious Master as his chief disciple and escort. He is 
the practical man, exceedingly able as a discoverer and 
inventor in all arts, especially as an unconquerable 
fighter of demons and evil doers, and in defence of his 
Master, and of truth and righteousness. 

Chu Wu NSng. The Pig, who personates 
irrepressible instincts, and man 'slower nature. He sins 
and is cast out of heaven and banished, but later is also 
converted by Kwanyin, and then volunteers to devote 
his strength to carrying the baggage of the religious 
Master, and becomes an assistant disciple. He is also 
called Pa Kiel, the Eight Commandments (Letter of the 
Buddhist Law?) But he has no sense, is too fond of ease, 
good feeding and pleasure : the drudge of the party. 

Sa Wu Ching. The Seeker after Purity, a sort of 
dandy Dolphin or strict Pharisee, who gains Heaven by 
Taoist methods, and is promoted to be a page in the court 
of Heaven: but owing to some carelessness there, is 
banished to the desert, the river of quicksands in high 
Asia, where he falls away from honest ways. Afterwards 
he is converted by Kwanyin and becomes the third 
disciple to escort the Master. He is an odd-job man, 
to look after the horse, baggage, etc. 

The "White Dragon Horse. He is from the 
Western ocean, having committed some sins as a dragon, 
whose chief is the god of rain, for which he is degraded 
into a horse. Afterwards he is also converted and joins 



XXXVlll 



INTRODUCTION 



the Pilgrims for the salvation of the world. He carries 
the Master to the West, and the Scriptures back to China. 

Demons. These personate the wild untamed 
passions of man, who use the forces of nature to rob and 
kill all for their own benefit regardless of the sufferings 
of others. Hell is the chief asylum of the Universe 
where these demons are kept under the control of just 
officers. (See Chap. 3) . 

Idols and Images. An idol is that which claims 
allegiance in opposition to God and goodness, and is 
therefore a traitor: an nnage, if it only illustrates the 
supremacy of God and goodness, as many in the Greek, 
Latin and Protestant Churches believe, is, like our 
illustrations in the Bible, not treasonable but helpful, 
especiallj'' to beginners. They are images but not 
contrary to the second commandment, any more than are 
our pictures. 

The Cassock and Biretta. Symbols of the Great 
World-wide Eeligion. The Patriarch of Antioch who 
ruled all Asia through his bishops, had uniform robes. 
See Chau Ju-Kua, pp. 104-10. 

The Hat of Spikes. Worn by the Monkey. When- 
ever the Master orders some very difficult work to be 
done, and the Monkey hesitates, the spikes enter into his 
head and give great pain. It is a chastening to make 
him perfect through suffering. (Chap 14.) 

The Peaches, The Wine and Pills of 
Immortality. These represent the intellectual and 
spiritual fruit and wine and medicine of the enlightened 
mystics. The Jewish Scriptures say that if the fruit 
of the Tree of Knouledge were eaten, man's eyes would 



INTRODUCTION xxxix 

be opened, and he would become like the gods. In 
this Epic the beautiful fruit, which makes man im- 
mortal, is not the apple referred to in the tradition of 
the AVest (not in the Bible), but the Peach. The 
demons also very frequently desire to eat the flesh and 
drink the blood of the Religious Master, as a sort of m3'stic 
magic sacrament, in order that they might thereby 
become immortal. Jesus said, "Whoso eateth my flesh 
and drinketh my blood hath eternal life. ' ' 

Timothy Richard. 



Shanghai, October 191S. 



A 



' 51 



7 



Kt?^>^'\\ ^i 



^\ 



J ^ 




M 






God as KEPRESENTLD by the HiGHEK ]iUDDU13TS 

IN Japan. 



CHAPTER I. 
SEARCH FOR IMMORTALITY 

Eternal Life impregnates the -world and a 
child is brought forth. 

Mind and soul unite and bring forth Religion. 

Chaos reigned ere order came, 
Darkness wrapped the world around, 
AVhen at last appeared Pan Ku. 
Light and bright he placed above, 
Heavy things he ranged below. 
Li^^ng creatures he called forth, 
All things needed he supplied. 
Creation's wonders if you'd see — 
Read this journey to the sky. 

We have heard that the age of the world is 129,600 
years for one kalpa, that these kalpas are divided into 12 
periods, just as the day and night are divided into 
12 Chinese hours, and each period is 10,800 years (or 
two half periods of 5,400). Speaking of the divisions in 
a day, there are twelve of 2 hours each, from midnight to 
midnight. But if we speak of the division of the kalpas, 
at the end of each there is a return to chaos and dark- 
ness. After the first period of 5,400 years, everything 
should be dark like night without any living thing. This 
state is called chaos. After the second period of 5,400 
years comes the era which gradually begins to open up 
with light. Hence the saying, ' ' The winter solstice is 
the re-beginning." But Nature never changes. Every- 
thing is dead then. Soon after, life again begins. After 



2 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

a third period of 5,400 j^ears more, the light parts of 
matter rise up, forming the sun and moon and stars. 
Towards the end of a fourth period of 5,400 years, the 
solid parts combine. The Book of Changes saj's, " How 
great is Heaven, how perfect is the Earth producing all 
things, the Earth henceforth is solid". After a fifth 
period of 5,400 years more, all the solids resolve into 
water and fire, into mountains, rocks and earth. After 
a sixth period of 5,400 years, at the end of another kalpa, 
all things are reproduced again. Heavenly influences 
descend and earth influences rise, and by the union of the 
two, all living things are produced. After the seventh 
period of 5,400 years, men and birds and beasts are 
produced. Thus we have the three great powers, 
Heaven, Earth and Man. Three Emperors came forth to 
rule the earth and five sovereigns fixed the social 
relations. 

(The above is a summary of the Author's version 
of the seven days of creation. — Tr.) 

Then the world was di-^dded into four great conti- 
nents : ( Ssu Ta Pu Chow) , the East continent of the Mighty 
gods; (Tung Shing Shen Chow) , the West continent of 
the Unicorns; (ShiMu Ho Chow), the South continent 
of the Shen Pu, (Nan Chen Pu Chow) and the North 
continent (Pei Ku Lu Chow.) 

(This book was written before the great geographical 
discoveries of the African, Australian and American 
continents, even of Europe. — Tr.) 

This book only describes the East continent of the 
Mighty gods. Beyond the ocean there was a country 
called Ao-lai. Near this country was a sea, and in the 




^f 
m 



Sun the Monkey. 



SEAECH FOR IMMORTALITY 3 

sea tbere was a famous mouutain called the Flower and 
Fruit mountain. This was the greatest of all the mount- 
ains of the world, the home of the Mighty (dragon) 
gods of the Three Islands. On the top of that mountain 
there was a living stone, 36 ft. 5 ins. high, and divided 
into 365 degrees like the heavens, and it was 24 feet in 
circumference, from which went forth 24 different in- 
fluences. Above it there were 9 openings and 8 holes, 
according to the 9 mansions and 8 diagrams of the Book 
of Changes. Since the beginning of time it had been ani- 
mated by the best forces of heaven and earth. Sun and 
moon had long influenced it, so that it had a living force, 
as a child in its mother's womb. On a certain day it 
split open and produced a stone egg, round like a big ball. 
After exposure to the air, this was transformed into a 
stone monkey with the five senses of the body complete, 
and able to creep and run. It turned and bowed to the 
four points of the compass, and its eyes glowed like 
burning light, the rays of which reached the stars, 
astonishing the dwellers in heaven, even unto the seat of 
God in His golden palace in the clouds, and the inner 
palace where the heavenly ministers were gathered. 

They saw the light burning brightly and ordered a 
telescope to be brought. (The telescope was invented by 
Galileo only in 1609 A.D., therefore the Chinese must 
have had some kind of telescope before we in Europe 
had it. — Tr. ) It was taken to the South gate of heaven to 
be looked through from thence. Immediately the two great 
heavenly angels returned and reported that the light came 
from the East continent of the Mighty gods, from the 
Ao-lai country where the Flower and Fruit Garden was 
on a mountain J on the mountain there was a stone 



4 iaSSION TO HEAVEN 

pillar, which had laid a stone egg ; when the egg was ex- 
posed to the air, it was transformed into a stone monkey 
that bowed to the four quarters of heaven ; its eyes shone 
with burning light reaching to the stars ; it ate and drank , 
but the light of its eyes was becoming dim. God took 
pity on it and said, " That far object below is not 
strange ; it is the living principle of life in the Universe. ' ' 
The Monkey on the mountain could walk and jump, 
eat vegetables and drink of the brook, pluck wild flowers 
and seek for fruit and berries, and make companions of 
monkeys and birds and join a herd of deer. At night he 
lay down on a rock. In the daj' he wandered about on 
mountain peaks and penetrated into caves. Truly he 
was the most incomparable of all living creatures. In 
the greatest cold he did not suffer. In the summer heat 
he joined a herd of monkeys seeking a cool place in the 
deep shade of fir trees. After play he would go to the 
mountain stream to bathe and watch the water rushing 
down the rocks. 

Then one day all the monkeys cried out, " Where 
does the stream come from? Let us follow it to its 
source. Call the monkeys all together." All came and 
shouted out, "Let us go." So they started up the 
stream and climbed the rocks till they came to its source, 
which was a great waterfall. Then all clapped their 
hands for joy and cried, " Beautiful, beautiful ! " But 
the waterfall came from a cave. Then they said, " "Who- 
ever dares enter the cave and find the source and comes 
out without injury, we shall make our king." Three 
times this cry was raised and agreed to. 



SEAKCH FOR BIMORTALITY 5 

In face of these difficulties, suddenly a monkey came 
forward and cried out, " I will venture in." A fine one 
he was. He shut his eyes, bent his body and rushed 
into the midst of the waterfall. Then he opened his eyes, 
and raised his head to see. There was no water, but 
there was an iron bridge. The water under the bridge 
filled a hole in a stone and then flowed out and covered 
the entrance to the bridge. Again on looking at the top 
of the bridge, he saw a house, most beautiful. After 
looking at everj'thing for a long time, he jumped over 
the bridge, and he saw in the middle a stone pillar. On 
the pillar were cut the words, ' The happy laud of the 
Flower and Fruit Garden, the water curtain of Heaven's 
cave.' The stone Monkey was delighted bej'ond 
measure. He shut his eyes again and doubled up his 
body and jumped through the waterfall to the outside. 

He sneezed twice and then said, " A graud find, a 
grand find ! ' ' Then all the monkej's gathered round and 
said, " What is it? Is the water deep?" He said, 
" There is no water at all, only an iron bridge. On the 
other side of the bridge is a Heaven-made palace, full of 
treasures." "How do you know that?" they asked. 
The stone IMonkey smiled and said, " This water comes 
from a stone hole under the bridge and flows out as a 
screen to the entrance. On both sides of the bridge 
there are flowers and trees and a stone palace. In the 
palace there are stone pots, stone stoves, stone basins, 
stone cups, stone beds and stone seats. In the midst 
there is a stone pillar on which is carved : ' The Happy 
Flower and Fruit Garden, the Cave of Heaven hid by a 
water curtain.' There is our true resting-place. Let us 



6 mSSION TO HEAVEN 

go and live there, lest we suffer from the weather." All 
were delighted with the news. "You lead us in and 
show us the way." 

Then the stone Monkey shut his eyes, doubled him- 
self up and jumped in, and all the rest followed in the 
same way, and jumped over the bridge, all of them 
struggling for the stone pots and pans and beds and seats 
with all the selfishness of monkeys, till all were quite 
tired. The stone Monkey sat with dignity and at last 
said, "Sirs, what will become of persons if they are 
faithless? You said M^hoever should be first in here and 
go unhurt, should be made king. I have now found out 
this Cave of Heaven where you rest in peace and enjoy 
the happiness of a palace. Why is it that you do not 
respect me as a king?" They all cried out, "Live, O 
king, for a thousand years." After this the king chang- 
ed his name and did not call himself the stone Monkey 
but the Beautiful Monkey King. 

Living beings all descend 
From three Powers, Heaven, Earth and Man ; 
In the womb of Fairy Stone 
Eoots the seed of Sun and Moon. 
, From the egg comes forth the ape. 

Thus their great work is performed. 
Then the work is crowned with name. 
Shapeless first all life begins, 
Then at last is perfect form. 
Age to age thus reproduced, 
Whether beast or man or sage. 

Then the Beautiful Monkey King led all kinds of 
monkej's who were princes, statesmen and their assist- 
ants, to the mountain garden in the day, and at night 



SEAUCH FOR IMMORTALITY 7 

they slept inside the water curtain. They did not join 
with the birds of the air, nor with the beasts of the fields, 
but lived as a kingdom in the enjoyment of the wealth 
of Nature for many centuries . 

One day, when feasting with his monkeys, suddenly 
the King began to weep. Then all the monkeys gathered 
round him and reverently asked what troubled him. He 
replied, " Although I am happy now, I am not without 
fear of future shadow." They laughed and said, " O 
great King, we live daily in this Happy Land and the 
Cave of Heaven in the continent of the gods, perfectly 
free without restraint and with infinite joy : what need 
is there to fear ?" The King replied, " Although to-day 
we break no human laws, nor have fear of being con- 
quered by wild beasts, still in time we shall get old and 
decrepit, and be in fear of the judge of the dead, who will 
not let us stay amongst the living." Hearing this, all the 
monkeys covered their faces and cried because they 
all feared death. At this there jumped from among 
them a strong one, and cried out with a loud voice, 
" Great King this sorrow of yours is an opportunity to 
gain Life eternal. Of all the wonders of the world, 
three are greatest : — the Buddhas, the Taoist Immortals 
and the Confucian gods. These have reached beyond 
transmigration and will never be re-born to die again, 
but will endure as long as Heaven and earth. The King 
asked, " Where do they live ?" The monkey said, " In 
the world after death, in the ancient Depths of the 
Eternal Mountain." 

On hearing this the King was much pleased and 
said ' ' To-morrow I leave you and go down the mountain 



8 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

and take a flight to a corner of the sea far on the horizon, 
and find out these three wonders, so that I may never get 
old, but live for ever and escape the hand of death. This 
is a happy thought, it is the sudden conversion spoken of 
in the Buddhist religion, whereby a man can escape the 
net of re-incarnation by transmigration, and become a 
great saint as lasting as the Heaven itself." 

At this all the monkeys rejoiced and clapped their 
hands, saying, " Good, very good ! to-morrow we also go 
across the mountain in search of fresh fruit to provide a 
big banquet for our great King" 

The next day all the monkeys went in search of 
fairy peaches and found a strange fruit and some mountain 
herbs. They laid out a fine table with fairj' wine and 
fairy dishes. Then they placed ten of the stone forms 
for the banquet, and invited the King to be seated and 
the monkeys in turn served the guests with wine and 
feasted themselves the whole day. 

The next day the Beautiful Monkey King got up 
early, cut up some dried fir-trees, and made them into a 
raft and took a bamboo for a punting-pole. He went on 
the raft alone and punted with all his might and was 
carried out by the tide to the open sea. There day after 
day he was carried by the South-East wind to the borders 
of the South — Shen Pu — continent on the North-west. 
Then he abandoned his raft and went ashore. 

There on the beach he saw some men fishing, others 
gathering cockles, others evaporating salt. He went up 
to them and impersonated the form and motions of a 
tiger, and so frightened the people that they ran away 
in all directions, leaving behind their baskets and their 



SBAECH FOR IJIMORTALITY 9 

nets. Finding one who was unable to run away, he 
stripped him of his clothes, and put them on as men did 
and walked with dignity across the country. When he 
got to the town, he learnt men's manners and their 
language, took his meals by day and slept at night. He 
searched with all his powers for the place where the 
three Immortals lived. He found all men were in search 
of fame or riches, and none sought for everlasting life. 
Truly as the poet says, 

Ever seeking fame and wealth. 

Late and early men are led; 

Riding horses and their mules. 

Dukes and princes seek high thrones. 

Food and raiment without work, 

Heedless of the doom of death, 

Sons and grandsons all want ease, 

None desiring to repent. 

The Monkey King, having no luck in his search for 
the way of the Immortals, and having spent eight or 
nine years in vain, suddenly came to the great Western 
ocean, where he thought beyond the sea must be the 
home of the Immortals. Then he got on a raft as before, 
and sailed West as far as the borders of the Unicorn 
continent, where he landed and searched for a longtime. 

Suddenly he saw a high mountain most beautiful, 
covered with forest and jungle. Fearing no wolves, 
snakes, tigers or leopards, he went straight to the 
mountain top. While looking about, he heard a sound 
far in the forest like the voice of man. He at once 
plunged into the forest and listened. It was a man 
singing, and the song he sang was this : — 
When chess 1 play the haft is burnt, 
The trees are felled all one by one. 



10 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

1 pass the clouda and slowly mount. 

I sell the wood and buy my wine. 

I laugh with joy and cry self -saved 

The way to heaven in harvest-moon. 

I sleep at foot of Tree of Life. 

When I awake 'tis heavenly day. 

Old trees I knov^, steep hills I climb, 

Beyond the pass make for the plain. 

With hatchet cut the withering vines, 

A bundle make of all my lot, 

Then sing away on road to mart. 

I buy my pints of daily rice, 

And then, why grudge I have no more ? 

My price is fair, my price is fair. 

Why should I worry to increase- 

Nor fame, nor shame ? Quite calm I live. 

Whoe'er I meet Immortal is, 

We sit and talk of Heavenly themes. 

The Beautiful Monkey King, on hearing this, was 
full of joy and said, "An Immortal hides himself 
here." He rushed forward, and behold, it was only a 
woodman lifting his axe and cutting wood. The king 
went up to him and said, " Venerable Immortal, I knee^ 
down before you as your disciple." The woodman 
hastily threw aside his hatchet and knelt likewise 
" Undeserving to be a man, I am ignorant, and with 
insufficient food and clothing, how much less am I an 
Immortal," The King said, " If you are not an 
Immortal, how can you speak the language of Immor- 
tals ? " What language of the Immortals did I use ?" 
asked the man. The King said, " I heard you say that 
your companions are Immortals, and when you meet 
you sit and talk of heavenly themes. Heavenly themes 
are true words of wisdom and religion. If you are not 



SEARCH FOR IMMORTALITY 11 

one of the Immortals, what are you ?" The woodman 
laughed and said, " The truth is, this song is called 
'The Fragrance that Fills the Hall,'" and one of the 
Immortals taught it me. He lives next door to me and 
he told me to sing it whenever I was in trouble and the 
trouble would vanish. It is because I was in need that 
I sang this song and did not expect anyone to hear me." 
The Monkey King said, " Since you live next door to an 
Immortal, why do you not follow him and learn how 
not to become old ?" The man answered, "All my life 
my lot has been bitter. My father died when I was 
young, mj' mother is a widow and depends on me alone. 
I must cut my two bundles of wood and carry them to 
the market for sale, and then buy rice for my mother's 
food. I therefore cannot leave my mother." The 
Monkey King said, " From what you say you are one of 
the superior rnen, full of filial piety, and surely you 
shall have a share of immortality. Please show me 
where the Immortal lives, so that I may pay my respects 
to him and learn of him." "It is near, quite near. 
This place is called the Heart of the Living Mountain. 
In the mountain there is the Slanting Moon and Three 
Star cave. In that cave there is an Immortal called the 
Fountain of Wisdom, and innumerable disciples taught 
by him have gone forth. He has some thirty or forty 
students now. You follow that small path and go 
southward for seven or eight li, and there is the place." 
The Monkey King laid hold of the woodman and said, 
" Venerable Brother, you come with me. If I receive 
good, I shall not forget your kindness." The woodman 
said, " What a stupid man you are I I have already 



12 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

told you whei-e to find him. I must cut wood and look 
after my mother. If I go with 3'ou I shall be neglecting 
my business, and who will look after my mother ? You 
go by yourself ! ' ' 

The Monkey King had to leave him, and went his way 
out of the forest for seven or eight li, and there surely 
was the cave. There he stopped and looked round — it 
was so beautiful. The door of the cave was closed and 
all was quiet with no one about. Raising his head he 
suddenly saw a stone on which was engraved fifteen 
words — ' The Heart of the LiA'ing Mountain, the Cave of 
the Slanting Moon and Three stars. ' The Beautiful King 
of the Monkeys was full of delight, and looked at the 
cave for some time, not daring to knock, lie climbed to 
the top of a fir-tree that was close by, and began chewing 
the fir tops. Shortl}' after he heard the noise of a door 
opening. It was the door of the cave. Out of it came 
an Immortal student who cried out, " Who is making a 
noise here?" The Monkey King dropped down from 
the tree, went up to him respectfully and said, " I am in 
search of Truth and Immortality, and therefore of all 
places I would not make a noise here." The Immortal 
student smiled and said, " Are you a seeker after 
Truth?" The King replied, "I am." The Immortal 
student said, "My professor has just gone up and 
mounted the platform to preach, and without giving me 
the reason whj-, he told me to come and open the door as a 
Truth Seeker had come, and I was to welcome him. 
I suppose it is you." The Monkey King smiled and 
said, "Yes, I am the one, I am the one." The student 
said, " Follow me inside." 







MEnrrATiON, seeuing Wisdom. 



SEAECH FOR BOIORTAIJTY 13 

The Monkey King adjusted his clothes and moved 
on respectfully after the student far into the Cave of 
The Slanting Moon and Three Stars throi:igh corridor 
after corridor, between high places of carnation marble, 
Vermillion mansions and precious gates of indescribable 
beauty, right up to the inner sanctum and there saw 
Wisdom sitting above. On either side of him were 
ranged his thirty disciples, standing on a platform 
below. Truly it was, — 

Greatest learning of Immortals, 

Unstained Purity, 
Western Heaven's greatest wonder, 

Wisdom's Fountain. 
Nor birth nor death experienced he, 

Perfect Model. 
Forces complete, godlike are all 

His myriad mercies. 
Silent, unseen, work all the forces 

As need requires. 
Instincts grow from roots of True Model 

Without forcing. 
His years like Heaven's endless are, 

Glorious his form. 
Lasting Wisdom throughout all kalpas, 

Teacher of AU-Law. 

Seeing him the Monkej' King fell on his knees and 
knocked his head upon the ground innumerable times, 
and said, "Master, Master, I want you to accept me as 
your disciple." The Master said, "Tell me where you 
are from and what your name is, and then you can 
perform the disciple ceremony." The Monkey King 
said, "I am from the East Continent of the Mighty gods, 
the Ao-lai country, the Mountain Garden and the Cave 
with the Water screen. " The Master cried, "Turn him 
out. He is a sower of discord, a false disciple. How 



14 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

can he bring forth any good fruit? " The Monkej' King 
grew alarmed, went on knocking his head without stop- 
ping, sa}dng, " What your disciple saj'-s is strictly true. 
I am an honest man." The Master said, "If you are 
honest, how can you say that you come from the East Con- 
tinent of the Mighty gods? Between us and that place 
there are two great oceans and the Southern Continent. 
How could you come here? " The Monkey King knocked 
his head and said, "I sailed across the seas, came 
ashore and travelled overland in search of Immortals for 
over ten years before I arrived here. " "Since j^ou have 
travelled so long and so far let it be. What is j-^our 
surname?" The Monkey King replied, "I have no 
temper. (The word for temper is pronounced like that 
for surname.) If men curse me, I am not troubled. If 
thej' beat me, I do not get angry. I only bow to them 
and there ends the matter. I was never in a temper in 
my life. " The Master said, "I do not ask about j^our 
temper. What surnames had your parents?" The 
Monkey King replied, "I never had parents. " " Since 
you had no parents, did you grow like fruit on a tree ? ' ' 
The Monkey King replied, "Although not grown on a 
tree, I grew from a stone. I only remember that in the 
mountain orchard there was a Fairy stone. One j-ear 
the stone split open and I was born." 

The Master was glad to hear this and said, " This 
speech shows that you are a child of the Divine Power 
above Nature. Rise up and let me see you walk. " The 
Monkey King jumped up and walked round twice. The 
Master smiled and said, "Though your body is not 
beautiful, you seem like a monkey who lives on evergreen 



SEAECH FOE IMMOETALITT 15 

pine and cones. I will give you a surname according to 

your nature and call you Sun. " The Monkey King 

was delighted, knelt on the ground again and said, 

Good ! Good ! Good ! Now that I have a surname, I 

beg that the Master will be kind and give me another 

name, to which I can answer when called." The 

Master said, " "We have twelve names, such as Breadth, 

Greatness, Wisdom, Model, Ocean, Nature, Versatile 

and Seeker after Complete Learning, and so forth, from 

which to choose. The most suitable for you would be 

Discoverer of Secrets, Woo Kung; will that do? " The 

Monkey King laughed and said, "Good! Good! 

Henceforth call me Sun, Searcher of Secrets. " 

There were no names when chaos reigned, 
The use of useless comes from thought. 

After all we do not know what secrets were found. Wait 

until the next chapter and see. 



CHAPTER II. 
MONKEY STUDIES MAGIC. 

Study -well the -vsrondrous ways of wisdom. 
Conquer -wrong, and cling to right and Heaven. 

After the Monkey had received a name, he settled 

down to study and remained there over six years. Once 

the Master lectured and taught: — 

Mysterious are the three E€ligions 
In essence and fruitage a,ll complete 

Now preaching, now praying 
All unite in one essential 

Eepentance and sincerity 
As the path of life for all. 

The Searcher of Secrets, on hearing this, felt like dancing 
for very joy, and moved his hands in great excitement. 
The Master asked him what was the matter. He replied, 
" Please pardon me, it is nothing but inexpressible 
delight at hearing such joyful tidings from you." The 
Master said, " You have now been here seven years. 
What more do you wish to study? There are hundreds 
of interesting subjects; which do you, want to take up? 
Do you wish to study the inactive subject, such as the 
art of calling up genii and obtaining oracles from the 
gods to avert evil and secure happiness, or do you wish to 
learn the six Schools of Thought — Confucianism, Taoism, 
Buddhism, Dualism, Universal Love and Medicine? 
Or do you wish to study Architecture, or will vou learn 



MONKEY STUDIES MAGIC 17 

Quietism, which means stillness, praj-er and meditation, 
silence and fasting, sleeping merit, standing m-erit and 
trances? Or do you wish to studj^ various objective 
activities, such as men and women, helpmeets, inward 
massage with the breath, the compounding of male and 
female essences, the use of human milk and such like?" 
The Monkey asked, " Will any of these show me how 
not to grow old?" The Master said, "No, not one." 
The Monkey King replied, "Not one of them will 
I study then." The Master jumped doMui from his 
platform and said, "You Monkey, what will you learn 
since you will study none of these?" and he hit the king 
three times on his head and went inside. The Monkey 
King thought this was onlj'the Master's private hint for 
him to come and see him at the third watch that night, 
and he would tell him the secret. At the third watch 
the Monkey King went in and found his Master's door 
half open. He went in and waked him. On waking 
the Master chanted : — 

Hard it is, hard it is, 

Mystery of mysteries to solve. 

The golden pill give out to man with care. 

The faithless ne'er can prize the gift divine. 

Your iDreath is spent, you preach in vain. 

At this the Monkey King said, " Since you signalled 
to me to come and get the secret of religion at this time, 
I have come here and have been kneeling to receive it 
for some time." The Master thought, "what a rare 
creature I have in this man! " and said, " I will tell you 
this great secret. 

To discover secret doctrine, perfect and profound, 
One must train the spirit's nature, only thi.s the art, 



18 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

This involves three primal forces, sex, and mind .and 

spirit. 
Secret keep this no divulging, fatal to reveal. 
Preserve with care your body's strength, 
Your secret strength conserve, increase. 
Obey my words, the Truth you'll find. 
Forget them not, the gain is great. 
Put off all thoughts of evil lust. 
Seek purity, shine bright. 
Your secret chambers flood with light. 
The moon protects the timid hare, 
The sun grows trees for birds to roost. 
Birds and rabbits join in revels, 
So do dragons have their mates 
Have their mates new life follows. 
E'en in fire grows a lily 
Differing natures, all converted, 
End their work as true Immortals." 

(To regard reproduction as sin is the fatal error in 
Primitive Buddhism, for if carried out, the human race 
and all living creatures would be extinct in the second 
generation. — Tr. ) 

The Searcher, having learnt the three secrets of 
Immortality — seed, soil and God, memorized these care- 
fully, and went on studying alone for three years more. 
Then the Master again mounted the platform and 
preached on the parable of the great judgment in its 
outward appearance. Suddenly he asked, " Where is 
the Searcher?' ' The Monkey King came forward, knelt 
and said, " I am here." The Master asked, "What 
have you been learning all this time? " " Your disciple 
has about mastered the study of the spiritual nature." 
The Master said, "Then you know the origin of 
things, that is — the Divine. But you must be careful 
of three great dangers." The Searcher, after pondering 



MONKEY STUDIES MAGIC 19 

over this for a long time said, " I have constantly 
heard it said that when one has found Truth and Virtue, 
then one becomes like God and no sickness can befall 
him ; how then do you speak of dangers to be avoided? ' ' 
The Master said, " Vv'^hat I teach you is not an ordinary 
doctrine, for it controls the forces of Heaven and Earth 
and the secrets of the sun, moon and stars. When one 
has arrived at this stage, then one is superior to the evil 
spirits and the ordinary gods. Still after a time there 
will come a thunder clap to try your soul and spirit. If 
unmoved and unshaken in the deluge, you will be like 
Heaven itself. If you doubt, then you perish. After 
a long practice of religion again, one is tried a second 
time. This danger does not come from God, nor from 
man, but from one's own passions. It burns one's 
whole body to ashes, and all one's long years of practice 
are in vain like a dream. After another long term of 
practice, one is tried a third time by the danger of 
environment, which blows on one like a typhoon and 
affects one's whole being. This must be overcome." 
"When the Searcher heard this his body shook and his 
hair stood on end. "0 Master have jjity on me, and 
tell me how to overcome these three dangers, and I shall 
never forget your kindness." The Master said, " That 
is not difficult. There are two ways to avoid them. 
One has 36 wonders, the other 72 ; which do you wish to 
know?" The Searcher of Secrets said, " I wish to know 
the 72 wonders." " Come here then, and I will tell you 
the incantation." Then he whispered it in his ear. 
Then the Monkey King felt influences going through 
every pore of his body, and began to practice the arts 



20 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

and to learn the v,-hole 72 wonders. Afterwards when 
they were outside the door of the Three Star Cave playing, 
the Master said, " Searcher, have you learnt all the 
arts?" He replied, " Thanks to your great kindness I 
have, and I can fly among the clouds.' ' The Master said, 
" Let me see what you can do. " At this, the Searcher 
bent himself and jumped some 50 or 60 feet in the air 
and walked on the clouds for about the time it takes one 
to have a meal, walked for a mile and then descended 
amongst them. The Master said, "That is not 
much. It is only creeping on the clouds. The ancient 
Immortals are said to have mounted in the morning as 
far as the Northern Sea, gone round the East, South and 
West Seas, and been back at night. The Searcher said, 
" This is not easy. " The Master said, " Easy enough i 
you have a mind to do it." At this the Searcher threw 
himself on his knees and, declaring he was in earnest, 
begged his master to be so kind as to show him how to 
do it again. The Master said, " You jumped when 
rising, j-ou should only bow and rise. But if you wish. 
I can teach you how to do it by somersaults." The 
Searcher knelt before him again and begged him to do 
so. The Master then taught him the incantation. Then 
with a clenched fist and a spring, the Searcher was off 
107,000 li. Being late the Master and students retired,, 
while the Searcher of Secrets went on mastering how to 
travel on the clouds, and for many days afterwards 
would do nothing else. (In other words the art of 
being guided by spiritual truth. — Tr. ) 

One day the students had a long talk together, and 
said, "Searcher, you have studied the mysteries of 



MONKEY STUDIES MAGIC 21 

Nature so deeply, that our ]Master has taught j^ou how 
to perform many wonders; can we all do this?" The 
Searcher laughed and said, " Truly if the Master teaches 
and you diligently learn, there is no reason why you 
should not learn all." They replied, "Show us some 
of your wonderful arts." The Searcher said, " Tell me 
what j-ou want and I will tr^^" They said, "Change 
yourself into a pine-tree." Searcher recited an incanta- 
tion, shook his body and was transformed instantly into 
a, pine-tree. 

Clouds come kissing -virgin pine, 
Wooded through the growth of years, 
Showing monkey traces none, 
Only hoarfrost on each branch. 

At the sight the students clapped their hands and cried 
in great admiration. The Master hearing, came out and 
asked what the matter was. When he heard he said, 
" You, Searcher, pledged yourself not to divulge the 
secret, and now you play with great things before the 
unworthy. If you do not divulge the secret to others, 
they will kill you." The Searcher wept and begged his 
pardon. But the Master said, "I cannot keep j^ou any 
longer, you must go, for j'our life is in danger. " Searcher 
said, "What shall I do?" "Go back whence you 
came," was the stern reply, " and never tell anyone that 
you are my disciple, or I will flay you alive." With 
this, the Searcher took leave of the Master and fellow- 
students, recited an incantation, jumped over the clouds 
and was back in an instant in the East Continent of 
th e Mighty gods, the Mountain Garden and the Water- 
screen Cave, and was glad, saying, 



22 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

"Leaving home T lonely was, 
Mortal frame and mortal seed. 
"When born again in spirit land, 
The body light became as air. 
In all the earth none have a mind 
To seek the truth and gather light." 

Finally the Searcher descended safely from the 

clouds, arrived at the Mountain Garden and there heard 

the monkeys crying bitterly. He said, "My children, I 

have returned, what is the matter?" Ten thousand 

monkeys, great and small, ran towards him from all 

the rocks and trees about, knelt before him and cried, 

" Whj did you leave us so long here without protection? 

We have been longing for your return like men who are 

hungry and thirsty. Of late we have been troubled by 

the Chief Disturber of the World's Peace, who wanted 

to take possession of the Cave by force. We fought him 

at the risk of our lives and manj"^ were killed. If you, 

great King, had not returned, there would soon have been 

no cave left us at all." The Searcher became very angrj' 

and asked what evil spirit it was that had dared do that. 

"We will soon have our revenge on him. Where does 

he live and how far away? " " We do not know. He 

«ame with the wind and went away in a fog." At this 

the Searcher said, "I will find him." And with this 

the Monkey King made a spring and disappeared to the 

North. There he saw a high and steep mountain. 

Mountain peaks like pencils pierced the sky, 
Mountain streams like gouges carved the rocks. 
There the fount of three worlds bubbled forth 
Giving strength by watering the earth. 

The Beautiful Monkey King hearing voices in this 
mountain, descended from the clouds and found a cave 



MONKEY STUDIES MAGIC 23 

from which flowed a river. About the entrance some 

small demons were at play. At the sight of the Searcher 

they ran. He cried out, " Do not run away. I am the 

Master of the Mountain Garden and Cave with the 

Water Curtain in the South. Your Black Chief, the 

Disturber of the World's Peace, has been frequently 

assaulting my children, and I have come to get an 

apology." The little demons ran in and said, " Trouble 

has come, O King," and repeated the message of the 

Monkey King. The Demon King laughed and said, ' ' I 

have often heard the monkeys say that they had a great 

chief, and that he had gone away to lead a religious life. 

I suppose it is he who has come. How is he dressed and 

how armed?" They replied, "He is not armed, but 

is hatless and dressed in a red gown and yellow girdle 

and black boots. He is not like an ordinary man, nor 

like a Buddhist or Taoist priest, and he is waiting 

outside with no weapons in his hands. " On hearing this 

the Demon King put on his armour, took a sword in 

his hand and went out, followed by a crowd of little 

demons, and cried out, " Where is the Master of the 

Water-screen Cave ?" The Searcher opened his eyes and 

saw the Demon King. 

Black helmet crowned his head. 
Red-coated was his back. 
Black armour over all, 
Black leather boots he wore. 
His girdle ten times others round 
His height was thirty feet. 
His hand bore a huge sword, 
All polished for the fight. 

Searcher cried out, " You incorrigible Demon. With 

your big eyes you cannot see me, Old Sun." The 



24 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Demon King, seeing him, said, " You are not five feet 
tall and not more than thirty years old, and have no 
weapons, how dare you be so mad as to talk to me about 
an apology ?" The Searcher cursed him and said, " You 
insolent Demon, it is plain you cannot see. You think 
I am small, but if I wish to be big, I can easily become 
big. You think I have no weapons, but I can stretch 
my arms to reach the moon. Do not be alarmed about 
me. Wait till you get a taste of my -fists. Let us have a 
bout of boxing.' ' The Demon King took off his armour 
saying, " You are short and I am tall. If you use your 
fists and I use a sword and kill you, it will be ridiculous. 
Let me put down my sword and fight with my fists." 
Having put down his armour, he then began fighting. 
The Searcher got close to him and they fought each 
other hard, but the long fist beat the air while the short 
one hit the mark. After the Searcher had given him 
several hard knocks, he began to swell. Suddenly the 
Demon King seized his great steel sword and made 
a rush to strike him down. The Searcher quicklj' evadad 
him, so that he struck the empty air. The Searcher 
then used one of his wonderful arts. He pulled out one 
of his hairs, put it in his mouth and chewed it into 
minute bits, then blew them out of his moutli and 
said, " Transform," and these bits were instantly changed 
into hundreds of small monkeys who gathered round 
him. The Monkey King, since he had discovered the 
supernatural gift, had 84,000 hairs on his body, and 
each of these could be transformed in like manner as he 
pleased. The small monkeys were so lively that the 
Demon could not hit them on the right or left. They 



MONKEY STUDIES MAGIC 25 

went at him from behind and before, they seized him 
and pulled him and tripped him, played with his hair 
and eyes, as if he were a pincushion. The Searcher then 
laid hold of his sword, went up amongst the monkeys, 
struck the top of his head till it split open, and went 
into the cave, killing as he went, and left not one of 
the demons alive. Then he put back the hair in its 
place on his body again. Those who did not suffer in 
the cave were the few tens of monkeys which the Demon 
King had carried captive before. He ordered them out 
to light a fire to burn all the rest in it. Then he told 
these monkeys to follow him home. " Shut your eyes 
tight." He then uttered an incantation, and a strong 
wind carried them over the clouds. When he descended 
from the clouds he called on them to open their eyes. 
They then found they were at home again, and were 
very glad, and ran into the cave as of old. Then all the 
monkeys assembled in the cave to welcome the king and 
get ready a banquet. They asked him how he had 
vanquished the Demon King. The Searcher told them 
the whole story. The monkeys' praises were intermin- 
able, and they asked, " Where great King did you 
learn all these wonders?" He answered, "That year 
when I left you, I sailed across the China Sea till I 
reached the Nan Chen Pu Chow (Malay Continent?) 
and there I learnt how to become a man, and put on 
clothes and boots for some 8 or 9 years, but had not 
found the secret forces of nature. I then crossed over the 
great Western ocean till I reached the Unicorn Continent 
in the West, and searched for this secret for a long time. 
Finally I met an old patriarch who taught me the true 



26 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

way of living eternal as the heavens, so as never to 
become old." All the monkej'^s congratulated him on 
having discoverd how to avoid all calamities. The 
Seacher smiled on his followers and said, " You may 
congratulate me on one other thing. You all have a 
family name now." They all cried, "Great King what 
is thy name ?" Searcher said, " My surname is Sun, 
and my name is Searcher of Secrets (the thinker) . 
When they heard this, they clapped their hands with 
great joy and said, "The great King is the venerable 
Sun, we are his sons and grandsons, one family and one 
nation — all of the same name. Let us all honour our Sun 
Ancestor with cups of cocoanut wine, grape wine and 
fairest fruits, for this is a great joy to the whol^ family." 

One family are we now, 

AU adopted in Heaven's home. 
What befall this family afterwards will be told in the 
next chapter. 



CHAPTER III. 
VISITS DRAGONS AND JUDGES OF HELL 

Has dominion over all the World. 
And names all creatures. 

The Beautiful Monkey King returned home with 
honours. Having killed the Disturber of the Peace of 
the World, he took away his great sword and daily 
practised with it. He taught the monkej^show to use it, 
how to make wooden swords to cut bananas and thistles, 
and how to build a camp. They played atthis for a long 
time. One day when sitting quietly he suddenly thought, 
"Perhaps this sham 'fight may become a real one. We 
may excite the fear of a human king, or of a king of the 
birds, or of the king of beasts, and they may say that we 
are practising military affairs in order to rebel and lead 
forth an army to kill. How can we get something better 
than these wooden weapons?" On hearing this, all the 
monkeys were filled with fear. Then four great monkeys, 
two red-tailed and two long-armed, went up and said, 
"Great King, if you wish sharp instruments, that is easy. 
Two hundred li to the south of us, across the water, on 
the 'borders of the Ao-lai country, there is a citj'^ full of 
soldiers. They have workers in copper and iron. If you 
go there you can buy or have made weapons with which 
we can practise for the defence of our mountain, and 
then we shall have nothing to fear." 

■On hearing this, the Searcher was full of joy. He 
leaped to the clouds and was there in a minute. The 



28 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

city had streets and markets and business, both small and 
great, a A-erj- busy place. The Searcher thought, "Here 
there must be plenty of ready-made weapons. I will go 
down and buy them. But perhaps I had better use 
my magic power." He pronounced an incantation and 
drew in his breath, and then blew it out. Then there 
arose a tremendous cj'clone blowing sand and stones, and 
the people of the Ao-lai nation were so terrified that they 
shut their doors, as none dare stay outside. The Searcher 
then descended from the clouds, went to the armoury and 
burst open the doors. Inside were eighteen kinds of 
weapons, ail complete. He rejoiced greatly at the sight. 
"But I cannot take many alone. I had better call my 
monkeys bj- magic. ' ' Then he plucked a hair, chewed it 
into bits, and blew them out with' an incantation, and 
many thousands of monkej's appeared. They cleared the 
armoury of all the weapons, took them through the air 
and retmned home with them. 

Then the Monkey King shook his body, put back the 
hair and set up the weapons in a heap and called the 
monkeys together to choose their arms. They came and 
struggled to get knives and swords, hatchets and spears, 
bows and arrows, and Avith these they played all day. 
Next day they were called to drill as usual, and Searcher 
numbered them and found them to be over 47,000. This 
frightened all the beasts of the mountain. The elf 
chiefs of the 72 caves on the mountain came to do homage 
to the ]Monkey King, and brought their yearly tribute. 
They were drilled everj- season, and all paid their taxes 
regularly, till the Mountain Garden became an iron city, 
where they drilled dailj- for military purposes . 



VISITS DRAGONS AND JUDGES OF HELL 29 

In the midst of this splendid success, however, the 
Beautiful Monkey King said, "I am not satisfied. My 
sword is very blmit, what shall we do?" The four elder 
monkeys came forward and said, "O great King, you are 
an immortal Sage, and all human weapons are of no use 
to you. But we do not know if you can live under 
water." The Searcher said, "Since I discovered the 
secret of life I know 72 magic transformations. I can 
ride through the air like lightning ; I can make myself 
invisible ; I can ascend to high Heaven or descend into 
the depths of the earth ; I can walk in sunlight or 
moonlight without throwing a shadow; I can go 
through metals or stones; water cannot drown me, fire 
cannot burn me. I am in possession of all these powers. ' ' 
The four elder monkeys said, "Since the great King has 
all these magic powers, and the water under our iron 
bridge flows to the Dragon Palace of the Eastern Sea, if 
you are willing to go down that water in search of the 
Venerable Dragon King, and ask him for a weapon, you 
may get what you want." The Searcher- rejoiced on 
hearing this and said, " I will go." 

He jumped on the bridge, recited an incantation^ 
dived and travelled to the Eastern Ocean under water. 
As he went he met some water elfs, who wished to stop 
him and asked him, "Tell us what holy Sage j^ou are, so 
that we may announce you for reception. " The Searcher 
said, "I am Searcher Sun, a natural Sage from the Moun- 
tain Garden, a neighbour of your Venerable Dragon King, 
how is it that you do not know me?" The water elfs, on 
hearing this, quickly turned and announced him at the 
Crystal Palace saying, "Outside there is a natural Sage 



30 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

from the Mountain Garden, named Searcher Sun. He 
says he is your Majesty's neighbour and comes to see you. ' ' 
The Dragon King of the Eastern Sea hurried out to meet 
him and said, "Honoured Sage, please enter." They 
entered in and saluted each other. After being seated and 
served with tea, the Dragon King said, " Honoured Sage, 
when did j'ou find the secret of life? and what magic arts 
do you possess?" The Searcher replied, "After I was born 
I left home to study religion and discovered a body vsdthout 
beginning or end, and now I have trained my children 
to defend the Mountain Cave. But alas, I have no 
weapons. I have long heard that you, worthy neighbour, 
are very happy. In your jewelled palace there must be 
abundance of splendid weapons; I have come to beg one 
of you. ' ' 

On hearing this, the Dragon King, unwilling to re- 
fuse, ordered one of his ofl&cers to bring one of the biggest 
swords and present it to him. The Searcher said, " I am 
not used to swords, please let me have something else." 
The Dragon King ordered another officer to carry out the 
nine-pronged fork for him. Searcher received it and tried 
its weight. He then put it down and said, "Too light, 
too light, I beg of you again to get me another." 
The Dragon King laughed and said, " Do you not know 
that this is 3 , 600 catties in weight? ' ' The Searcher said, 
" It is no use for my arm, no use at all." The Dragon 
King began to fear and ordered his general to carry out 
the spear that was 7,200 catties in weight. The Searcher 
tookit into his hand and made a few thrusts with it and 
said, "This is far too light." The Dragon King now 
feared greatly and said, "This, is the heaviest spear I 



VISITS DRAGONS AND JUDGES OF HELL 31 

have. I have no other weapons. ' ' The Searcher laughed 
and said, ' ' The ancients had a saying that no one need 
trouble about the Ocean Dragon kings being without 
precious things. Please once more search, and see if 
there be a suitable weapon, and I will buy it." The 
Dragon King said, "Really there are no more." 

Just as he was speaking, two beautiful women came 
in at the back door saying, " Great king, see, this is a 
great Sage and not an ordinary being. In the sea store- 
house there is that miraculous iron from the Milky Way. 
To-day it sparkles with light as if it desired to come forth 
to meet this Sage. It is the rod of the great Yu, who 
regulated the waters of the deluge and judged of the 
depth of the water." " It is a divining rod, of what use 
is that?" The women replied, " No matter whether it 
be of use or not, let him have it and do what he likes 
with it." The Dragon King told the Searcher, who 
said, ' ' Let me see it. ' ' The Dragon King shook his head 
and said, ' ' It cannot be carried, it cannot be moved 
even, it is so heavy. Honoured Sage, you must go and 
see it yourself." The Searcher said, " Lead me to it." 

The Dragon King took him to the Ocean store- 
house, and there were innumerable rays of light radiating 
from it in all directions. The Dragon King said, " That 
is it, lying there ! " The Searcher jerked off his coat and 
went up close and touched it. It was an iron pillar as 
stout as a bushel measure and over 20 feet long. The 
Searcher stretched both his arms around it, then said, 
" It is a little too stout and too long. If shorter, it would 
do." At the sound of these words the precious pillar 
became a few feet shorter and thinner. Searcher tried 



32 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

its weight again and said, ' ' Still a little smaller, it would 
be better." Then it became some fractions less. 
Searcher was greatly delighted at this. Then he took 
it out of the storehouse to look at it, and behold 
at each end were golden prongs, but in the middle 
between the prongs it was black iron, on which was 
engraved its name— AS YOU LIKE IT. It weighed 
13,500 catties (about 8 tons. — Tr.) He rejoiced 
greatly in his heart and thought, ' ' This is a precious 
thing, such as I wish!" As he walked away, he 
wished the pillar shorter and thinner, so as to be more 
convenient. He carried it away. When he arrived out- 
side, it was only 12 feet long and about the diameter of a 
rice bowl. At the sight of him walking about the Crystal 
Palace with this magic power, the old Dragon King 
trembled with fear and the young dragons were fright- 
ened out of their wits, and all the reptiles and dwellers 
of the deep ran away to hide themselves. 

The Searcher sat in the crj-stal palace of the Dragon 
King, holding the precious weapon in his hand, and 
said to the Dragon King smiling, " Many thanks, neigh- 
bour, for your great kindness. I have one thing more to 
say. If there had been no such iron staff, I would have 
had nothing to ask. But since I have it, I have no 
armour to match it. Please let me have a suit of armour, 
and I shall be much obliged." The Dragon King said, "I 
am sorry, I have nothing of the kind." The Searcher 
said, "A visitor does not trouble more than one host. 
If you cannot find one, I will never leave this place." 
The Dragon King said, " Please look through another 
sea, perhaps you can find some armour." The Searcher 



VISITS DRAGONS AND JUDGES OP HELL 33 

said, " It is better to remain in one quarter than to search 
in two quarters. I beg of you a million times to give me 
a suit." The Dragon King said, " Truly I have none. 
If I had, I -would give it you." The Searcher said, 
" Since you will not give it, let me try this weapon 
on you." The Dragon King became much alarmed 
and said, " Worthy Sage, please do not. Wait till I 
find if mj' brother has anj', then I will give you a 
suit." The Searcher said, "Where is your brother?" 
The King replied, "One brother, Ao Kin, is King 
of the Southern Ocean, another, Ao Sun, is King 
of the Northern Ocean, while the third, Ao Yun, is 
King of the Western Ocean." The Searcher said, 
"I will not go to them. A bird in the hand is 
worth two in the bush. I hope you will find me one 
somewhere." "You, worth}' Sage, need not go," said 
the Dragon King. "I have here an iron drum and 
a golden bell. When there is anything verj' urgent we 
beat the drum and strike the bell. Then my brothers 
come here at once." The Searcher then said, " Beat the 
drum and strike the bell immediately." 

True enough, as soon as the drum and bell sounded, 
the three Dragon brothers were alarmed and immediately 
appeared. Ao Kin asked, "Elder Brother, what is the 
matter ? Why do you beat the drum and strike the 
bell ?" The Old Dragon said, "I am afraid to tell you. 
There is a natural Sage from the Mountain Garden come 
to call on me as a neighbour, and he desires some 
weapons. I gave him the steel prong, but he said it was 
too small. When I gave him the carved lance, he said it 
was too light. Then I took from the bottom of our cave 



34 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

the wonderful iron staff. He took it, threw off his coat, 
and he now sits in the palace and demands some armour. 
I have none here, therefore I beat the drum and the bell. 
My dear brothers, let him have a suit so that he may 
go. " The brother Ao Kin hearing tliis, got very angrj' and 
cried, " Let lis get soldiere and arrest him." The elder 
Dragon said, " Do not do that, do not do that! If he 
touches you with that iron beam, or if it falls upon you, 
you are a dead man." The third brother, Ao Yun, said, 
* ' We must not fight with him. The best thing we can 
do is, to give him a suit of armour so that he maj* go. We 
w^ill memorialize high Heaven about him and Heaven 
will punish him." Then Ao Sun said, " That is right 
I have here a pair of silk sandals for travelling in the 
air." Ao Yun said, " I have with me a chain coat with 
gold buckles." Ao Kin said, " And I have a red gold 
helmet." At this the elder Dragon King was greatly 
pleased, and led them to the crj'stal palace to be pre- 
sented to his visitor. 

The Searcher took the gold, helmet, and the gold- 
buckled coat and the silk sandals and put them all 
carefully on. Then he took up the magic beam and 
walked straight out, saying to the Dragon King, " You 
can whistle as loud as you like now." The four Sea 
Kings were greatly displeased at this and discussed how 
they might memorialize about the matter. But the 
Monkey King looked for his water-way in order to get 
back to the top of the iron bridge in his cave. 

All the monkeys were there gathered, waiting' for 
him. Suddenly the Searcher jumped out of the water, 
with not a drop of water left on him, and landed on the 



VISITS DRAGONS AND JUDGES OF HELL 35 

Iron bridge. At the sight all the monkeys were greatly 
frightened, and fell on their knees saying, "Great King, 
liow beautifullj' dressed you are." The Searcher was 
mightily pleased and ascended a high throne. He took 
the iron beam and made it stand on end in their midst. 
The monkeys were all full of wonder and came round to 
feel that precious beam, but their strength •was like that 
of flies, and they could not move it the least bit. Thej' 
all put out their tongues and cried, " Ai-yah! ai-yah! 
"Grandfather, it is terribly heavy. How did you manage 
to bring it? Such a tremendous weight!" 

The Searcher came up, took it in his hand, and 
•smiled at them. " Everything has a master, so has this 
precious beam. It has been lying in the storehouse of 
the sea, who knows for how many thousands of years. 
But just when I was there, it emitted light in all 
directions, and the Dragon King thought it only a bit of 
black iron. But it was called Pearl from the Milky 
l\'^ay. None of the people there could move it, so they 
iisked me to go and take it. At that time this precious 
beam was more than twenty feet long, and stouter 
than a bushel measure. When I looked at it, I thought 
it was too big, then suddenlj' it became less. I thought 
it still too big, and again it became much less. On it are 
engraved a few words, ' AS YOU LIKE IT ' (meaning, 
if you want it hea.\j, it will be heavy, if you want it light 
it will be light. — Tr.) All of you stand back and I will 
•command it to change, so tliat you can see what it wiU 
•do in my hand. When I say, ' Small, small, small,' 
instantly it becomes the size of an embroidery needle, 
so that I can hide it in my ear." And so it was. 



36 MISSION TO HEA^^EN 

All the monkej'S were greatly astonished and said, 
"O great King, show us how j'ou handle it." The 
Monkej' King took it from his ear, put it on the palm of 
his hand and cried, 'Big, big, big.' Instantly it became 
as a bushel measure in thickness and twenty feet 
long. He took it in his hand with great joy, jumped 
outside the cave with it, and then exercised his ovm 
magic, which was as extensive as the Forces of 
Nature. He doubled up his back and cried out, "Be 
long." In an instant he was 100,000 feet tall, and his 
head was as high as the peak of Tai Shan. His loins 
were, as great as mountain ridges, his eyes like lightning, 
his mouth like a bucket of blood, his teeth like sharp 
spears. He then took the magic lance in his hand, 
which reached up to the 33rd heaven and down to the 18 
hells, frightening the 72 demon kings in hell, so that 
they all kowtowed to him in fear and trembling. In the 
twinkling of an eye, he took the precious lance, changed 
it by magic to the size of an embroidery needle, and hid 
it in his ear, and then returned to his cave. 

After this, all the demon kings came to paj' hom- 
age to him. Then according to previous arrangement 
they hoisted the flag and beat the drum. The Monkey 
King appointed the four elder monkeys to be strong 
guardian generals. The two red-tailed ones, who 
were called the Horse-like generals, and two long-anned 
ones, who were called Palm-leaf generals, regulated 
all the rewards and punishments in the camp. Since 
these matters were in the hands of the four generals, 
the Monkey King was at leisure to mount the clouds, 
and visit the seas in the fom* quarters of the world, and 



VISITS DKAGONS AND 'JUDGES OF HELL 37 

see the heroes of all lands. 

At this time he met six brothers — the king of the Ox 
devils, the king of the Crocodile devils, the king of the 
Roc devils, the king of the Lion devils, the king of the 
Gorilla devils and the king of the Baboon devils, 
and daily discussed with them civil and militarj'^ affairs', 
feasting and drinking from morning till eve, and enjoy- 
ing unlimited pleasure. 

One day, he invited the six kings to dine at his 
cave, and thej' drank until they were all incapable. After 
seeing his guests off later, while leaning on the iron 
bridge in the shade of the pine-trees, he suddenly fell 
asleep. The four generals at once surrounded him with 
their forces, to protect him, but dared not speak in case 
they might wake him. The Monkey King dreamt he saw 
two men carrying a warrant, with the name of Searcher 
Sun on it, approach" him, and without any words 
bind him with ropes, take his soul awaj', and carry 
him off' to the gates of a citj''. The Monkey King saw 
above the gates of the city an iron tablet on wliich was 
written, 'The World of Hades.' The King said, "The 
world of Hades is the place where Yen Lo the judge of 
the dead lives; how is it that I am here?" The tAvo men 
replied, "Your days on earth are numbered, and we two 
have been ordered to fetch you here." The Monkey 
King on hearing this said, "I have crossed over bej'ond 
the gates of death and am no longer to be counted 
among mortals and cannot be under the rule of the 
judge of Hades. How have you so blundered and dared 
lo bring me here?" The two who had so far dragged 
him along, were determined to drag him in. The King, 



38 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

getting angrj', dreAv out from his ear bis preciousr. 
weapon. It shone forth as he caused it to grow large, and 
with it he beat the two men to a pulp. He then tore o8r 
the rope which bound him, cast off the hand-cuffs and 
making of them a weapon went into the city. He 
frightened the bull-headed and horse-headed demons, 
so that thej' flew in all dii-ections towards the office of 
Yen Lo and reported the matter to the great chief 
crying, " A great calamity, a great calamity. Outside- 
a bearded thunderer has come." Thus they terrified 
the ten officers of the Lower Eegions, so that they 
hurriedly donned their official robes and went to see- 
Finding the Monkej'^ king so terrible, they cried out 
loudly in succession to him, " Excellency, write down 
your name, write down your name." The Monkey king 
said, " If j'ou do not know me, how is it you sent 
to fetch me? I am fi'om the Mountain Gai-den, from 
the Waterfall Cave, a natural Sage whose name is Sun,, 
the Searcher of Secrets. Tell me what offices j'ou hold. 
Tell me quickly or I will thrash you." The officers 
bowed and said, "We are : — 

Prince Tsin Kwang, Prince Tsu Kiang, Prince Yen Lo,. 
Prince WuK wan, Prince Sung Ti, Prince PingTeng, 
Prince Tai Shan, Prince Tu Ssu, Prince Pien Ching, 
Prince Twan Lun — the Princes of the Ten Offices of 

^^^"^^^^ (SeeChap. XL— Tr.) 

The Searcher of "Secrets said, "Since you all have 
attained to the position of princes in Hades, you should 
clearly understand the ground of rewards and punish- 
ments. How is it that j'ou do not know the difference 




Yen Lo. the Chief Judge of Hades. 



VISITS DRAGONS AND PRINCES OP HELL 39 

between right and wrong? I, Sun, have become one 
of the genii and shall live as long as God, for I have 
transcended the three realms and am beyond the control 
of ordinary life and death; how is it that you sent men 
to arrest me?" The ten princes said, "Your Excellency, 
do not be angry. The number of people of the same 
name in the world are many. It must be that those 
who arrested 3'ou made a mistake." Sun, the Searcher 
of Secrets, said, "Nonsense, nonsense. We constantly 
hear that the officials knoM' how to xise their subordinates. 
The two men who came were quite right. Let me see 
your Book of Life at once." On hearing this, they 
asked him to go to the office and see it. The Searcher of 
Secrets, taking his magic club, ascended to the Sun Lo 
Hall and sitting in the chief chair, facing the South, 
commanded the judge to bring him the Register of 
those who were to die. He searched those of the 
ten offices; among stinging animals, hairy animals, 
feathery animals, reptiles and creatures in shells, 
but among them all there was not one with his name. 
Then he searched among the names of all kinds 
of monkej's. But monkeys, although somewhat like 
men, had no names like men, and thei-efore were 
like beasts, not under the control of the Kilin; like 
birds, but not under the control of the Phoenix. There 
must be another Register. The Searcher of Secrets 
looked for it himself. Under the name Soul No. 1350, 
he found his own name, Sun, the Searcher of Secrets, a 
naturally born stone monkey, who should live 342 
years, and then die a natural death. The Searcher 
said, "I do not know my own age myself. Let me 



40 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

strike out the name," and he took up the pen, 
dipped it deep into the ink and went through tlie list of 
monkeys. Everyone that had a name he struck out, and 
then threw the register down and said, "There is an 
end of the Registration. Tliere is an end of the 
Registration. I am no longer under your control." 
Then with -his magic club, he cleared his way out 
of Hades. The ten princes did not dare to go near 
him, but all went to the Feathery Cloud office to 
worship the Buddhist Saint — the Chaplain Prince, and 
consult him as to how to memorialize High Heaven. 
The Monkey King, having got out of the City of the 
Dead, stumbled against a bundle of straw and fell. This 
woke him up and he realised that it was only a dream. 

He stretched himself out and heard the four strong 
generals and all the monke3^s S{i3nng, " The great king 
must have drunk an immense amount of wine to sleep 
as late as this. The Searcher said, ' After I had slept 
a little, I dreaant that two men had come to take me to 
the land of the dead, and I have onh' just waked up. 
But in nw dream I wrought wonders, entered the 
Sun Lo Hall, and had a quarrel with the ten 
Princes of Hades, saw the Register of Life and Death, 
and struck out everyone that had our name, so that they 
might never be under the control of these fellows." All 
the monke3-s fell on their faces and kowtowed. From 
that time there were many of these mountain monkeys 
who did not get old at all, because their names were not 
to be found on the fatal Register. AVe will not further 
describe how the Beautiful Monkey- King daily enjoyed 
himself. 



VISITS DRAGONS AND PRINCES OP HELL 41 

But we will relate how one day God, sitting in the 
golden palace of the clouds in the precious Divine Court 
of the Sk}', called togethei- all the civil and military 
ministers of heaven. During their morning audience, 
suddenly a saint named Kiu Hung memorialised and 
said, ' ' May the Sovereign reign for ever. Outside the 
Tung Ming Palace, the Dragon King Ao Kwang, of the 
Eastern Ocean, has arrived to memorialise and is waiting 
to be called in his turn." God commanded that he 
should be admitted. Ao Kwang was called to approach 
the Throne. After he had worshipped, he presented his 
memorial and a boy-angel received it. The memorial 
was as follows, ' Your humble Dragon Master Ao Kwang 
of the Eastern Ocean of the continent of the Mighty gods, 
on earth for ages, memorialises the Sacred Sovereign of 
High Heaven, the Great Ruler of the Universe. Sun, 
the Searcher of Secrets, a monster from the Mountain 
Garden of the "Waterfall C^ave, has insulted your humble 
petitioner, forced himself into our Ocean Palace, and asked 
for weapons and armour. I and mj'^ brothers gave him 
the precious magic iron club, a red gold helmet, chain 
armour and sky boots, and saw him off most civillj^. 
But he played tricks, used magic to frighten us with his 
threats and power, so that he was most difBcult to man- 
age. We humbly appeal to your sacred judgment, and 
beg that j'ou send legions from heaven to arrest this 
monster, so that the ocean and rocks may not be troubled, 
and our ancient home be at rest.' 

When God had read the memorial through, he 
ordered the Dragon Prince to return to his ocean home 
saying, "I will send generals for the monster's arrest." 



44 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Literary star to prepare an edict, and the angel of the 
planet Venus to carry it to the Monkey King. The angel 
of the planet Venus took it and -went outside the South 
gate and proceeded do%m on a luck}"^ cloud, till he got to 
the Mountain Garden of the "Waterfall Cave. There he 
said to the crowd of small monkej's, " I am an ambassa- 
dor sent from God himself with an imperial edict to invite 
your great king to go to heaven. Go and tell him at 
once!" The little monkeys outside tlie cave rushed in 
at once to the depths of the cave and said, " Great King, 
outside there is an old man, carrying a despatch on his 
back, who sa\-s he is an ambassador sent from God with 
an edict to invite you to heaven." The Monkej- King 
was verj' delighted to hear it, and said, " These last few 
days I have just been thinking of going to heaven to 
look at it. Quickly invite the messenger in." The 
Monkey King hurriedly put on his clothes and went out 
to meet the minister of the planet Venus who came inside 
and standing with his face to the South said, "I am 
the minister of the planet Venus from the West, sent 
down to earth by command of God, with a despatch 
to invite you to heaven for audience, and to become 
one of the officials amongst the gods." The Searcher 
smiled and said, "I am much obliged to you 
minister of Venus, for coming down. We must 
arrange for a worthy banquet." The minister of 
Venus, repUed, " I have the despatch with me and I 
must not tarry long. I beg of you to return with me." 
The Searcher called his four strong generals and com- 
manded them saying, " Be careful to drill my monkey's 
while I go to heaven to know the road, so that I may later 



VISITS DRAGONS AND PRINCES OF HELL 45 

take you with me there." Having given his commands, 
the Monkey King with tlie minister of Venus rose 
amongst the clouds and passed heyond them. 
Thus they moved as highest gods, 
Their names enrolled beyond the clouds. 
So far 3'ou do not know what position he was given 
in heaven , but wait till the next chapter. 



CHAPTER IV. 
DECLINES BEING A STUD MASTER. 

Office and horse are vain things, 
Empty titles are also vain. 

The Minister of Venus and the Beautiful Monkey 
King ti-avelled together above the clouds, but the Monkey 
King travelled so quickly that the minister was left 
behind, for the Searcher was perfect.]}' skilled in the art. 
He arrived at the South Gate, and when about to enter, 
was led by one of the heavenlj' princes into a trap. On 
all sides were strong legions guarding the gate and they 
would not let him in. The Monkej' King said to him- 
self, "This ancient angel of the planet is treacherous. 
Since he invited me to heaven, wh}' is he setting guards 
with swords and spears to bar the gate of heaven, and so 
prevent me, Old Sun, from entering?" In the midst of the 
confusion, the ancient minister arrived. The Searcher 
with a face full of anger said, "You old fool, why did 
you deceive me? You said j-ou came by the order of 
God to invite me. How is it then that you have these 
men barring the gate of heaven and not allowing me to 
enter?" The angel smiled and said, "Great King, do 
not be angry. You have never been in heaven before, 
and none of the guards know you, how could the}' dare 
to let you in ? AA'ait until we have an audience with His 
Majesty and j-ou are given an official position among the 
gods, then you can go in and out as you please." The 




Yij Ti THE Celbstial Empekok. 



DECLINES BEING A STUD MASTER 47 

Searcher said, "Very well then, we shall see. I will not 
go in." The angel laid hold of him and said, "You 
must go in with me." He called out in a loud voice for 
the guards to make way, "This is one of the genii of 
earth. I have been commanded by His Heavenlj^ 
Majesty in a sacred edict to invite him to heaven." 

Then the Monkey King walked in with the angel, 
and he saw — 

Glorious light in myriad rays, 
Thousand forms of radiant clond; 
Gold and silver were the courts. 
Decked with flowers fit for gods. 

The angel led the Beautiful Monkey King towards 
God's own chamber. There he did not wait to be called, 
but went up and fell on his knees. The Searcher, 
however, stood upright and looked on without any signs 
of reverence, and listened to the angel who said, "Your 
minister, having received your august command, 
proceeded to invite the spirit here." "Which is the 
monster spirit? " It was then that the Searcher bowed 
and replied, "It is I, Old Sun." All the heavenly minis- 
ters were greatly alarmed at his manner and said, "Why 
does this wild monkey not do obeisance at an audience, 
and not only rudely reply, ' It i& I, Old Sun'? He should 
be killed, he should be killed !" His august Majesty said, 
"Sun, the Searcher of Secrets, is a monster spirit from 
the lower world, having only been transformed into man 
for the first time, and has not yet learnt court etiquette, 
We therefore forgive him." All fhelieavenly ministers 
cried out, "Thank God for his mercy." But the Monkey 
King only faced God and cried out with a loud voice. 



48 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

"Yes." God then ordered the civil and military ministers 
of state to find where there was an empty official post, and 
let Sun, the Searcher of. Secrets fill it. At the side there 
was a military angel who memorialized and said, "In 
the heavenly court there is no empty post, but in the Im- 
perial stud there is Avanted a Master of the wild horses." 
All the ministers called out, "Thank His Majesty's 
Grace." But the Monkey King only faced God and with 
a loud voice cried "Yes." God then ordered the angel of 
Jupiter to go with him to his office as Master of the 
Horse. Then the Monkey king was delighted, and went 
with Jupiter to his new post. "When that was ac- 
complished, Jupiter returned. 

The Monkey king at his office called together his 
subordinates, the heads and their assistants, the clerks 
and sei-vants, so as to have a clear knowledge of his 
duties as Master of the Horse, and found there were onlj' 
one thousand horses. He examined the registers and 
verified the number of the horses, the superintendents of 
accounts and of fodder, and the servants who fed and 
cleaned the horses. The superintendents and subordin- 
ates worked night and day looking after the stud of horses, 
so that thej' became frisky and fat. The Monkej- King's 
subordinates were much pleased and in about a fortnight 
decided to give him a banquet, partly of \velcome, and 
partly of congratulation on his promotion. 

In the midst of the banquet, the Monkey King asked, 
"What is the official rank of the Master of the Horse?" 
They answered, "He has no rank." The Monkey King 
said, "Since he has no rank, the position must be verj" 
high and unequalled." They replied, "No, no, it is not 



DECLINES BEING A STUD MASTER 49 

great.- It is considered the position before getting anj' 
rank at all. It is the lowest. The ministers think he is 
only good to look after horses. After having taken so 
much care of the horses as you have done, all you can 
expect is, that they are pleased with you, but if there is 
anything wrong you will be censured, and if very wrong, 
you will be punished." When the Monkey King heard 
this, he became very angry, ground his teeth and said, 
"This after all is only an insult to me. Old Sun. In my 
Mountain Garden they call me King and Father. How 
dare they invite me here merely to look after horses? 
Is this the way they should behave towards me? I will 
not stand it! I will not stand it! I am going!" In an 
instant he pushed over, with a great noise, the table at 
which public justice was administered, pulled out his 
precious weapon from his ear, and having got it to its 
proper size, rushed out through the gate of the Imperial 
Horse Yamen , and proceeded straight towards the South 
Gate. All the guard knew he had been given an official 
position in heaven as Master of the Horse, so did not 
dare to stop him as he passed outside. 

In a moment he mounted a cloud and reached his 
Mountain Garden in no time. There he found the four 
great generals drilling the monkeys. 

The- Monkey King cried out, " M}' children, your 
old father Sun has come back.' ' All came out to welcome 
him, and then entering the cave invited the King to 
sit on a high throne. In a side room they prepared 
a banquet in honour of his return. ' ' The Great King has 
been away in heaven over ten years. What high honours 
he miist have secured." The Monkey King rei^lied, " I 



50 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

have not been atray a month, what do you mean by 
saying it is Over ten years ?" The monkeys r^lited, 
" Great King, "when in heaven, you were not aware 'Of 
the flight of time. One day in heaven is one year in the 
l-eckoning of naortal men. May we know, great king, 
what official position you occupied there? " The Monkey 
King wa'ved his hand and said, " I a»i adiamed to tell 
you. It nearly killed ma The Ruler of H-eaveii doies 
not know how to choose men. He only appointed me 
to be Master of Horses, simply to look after the feeding 
of his horses, 1ii« lowest official position of all. When d 
arrived at my post, I did not then know it. But to-^day 
when I learnt it from my colleagues., I, Old Sun, was 
filled with wrath and came away." The monkeys said, 
" The Great King is happy in his home, and is acknow- 
ledged King with much reverenoe and joy. Why should 
he go and become a stable boy ? Let us get some winej 
so that h6 may forget his humiliation." 

Whilst they were drinking wine together, there 
came in a man, who said, " Great King, atourgatethei© 
are two one-horned kings who wish to see you." Th6 
Monkey King said, " Let them come in." The two 
kings outside straightened their clothes, entered the 
Cave, kowtowed and said " We have long heard of the 
great king who is in search of worthy officials, but we 
had no opportunity of meeting him before. Now we 
have heard that the great king has been given a post in 
heaven. He must be pleased, and have come back with 
honours. So we have come to present him with a 
yellow robe as a token of congratulation. If he will 
kindly accept it, please let him use it as he does his 



DECLINES BEING A STUD MASTER 51 

hoises and -dogs.' ' The Monkey King W;^s ivery pleased^ 
pot on the yelloiy lobe ajtid appointed the ^emoiii kings 
as yieeroys under him. 

Having thanked hjm for his favour, th^ demon 
kings said, " You -were in heaven a long time, what 
rank did you occupy there ?^' The Monkey King 
replied, " The Ruler of Heaven did not respept me, ^nd 
simply appointed me to look after some hoRseg.." The 
demon kings said, "Since you, Great King, liaye 
marvellous magic powers, how did you auhmit vto merply 
looking .after horses ? If you had caJied yourseH the 
Holy One, the Equal of Heaven, there would have been 
nothing you could not have done. " The Monkey King 
wa^ delighted beyond measure on hearing this, and 
could not refrain from repeating, " Good, good, good!" 
several -times. He ordered his four generals to make 
him a banner on which was to be written in large letters, 
' The Holy One, the Equal of Heaven.' He .put up 9- 
tall flagstaff and hoisted the banner, and cried," Hence- 
forth never again call me the Great King, but th^ Holy 
One, the Equal of Heaven. Report this to all the demon 
chiefs, so that they may know." 

The day after the Monkey King had left' his post in 
heaven, when the court was about to assemble, the 
master of ceremonies brought in the two assistant grooms 
instead of the Master of the Horse. They knelt before 
the throne and said, " May the King live for ever. We 
beg to say that the new Master of the Horse, not satisfied 
with the low position assigned to him, has left Heaven 
altogether. ' ' The Keeper of the South Gate then entered 
and reported that the Master of the Horse had passed 



52 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

out at the South Gate without giving any reason. When 
the Great Ruler heard this, he commanded that the 
two oflficers should return to their respective posts, 
and said, " We shall send heavenlj- legions to arrest this 
truant." From among the courtiers, there stepped 
forward a heavenly Prince, named Li To-fa, and his 
third son Prince Na-to, and said, "We beg to suggest 
that, although we have no ability, Your Majesty 
issue an order for us to subdue this monster." The 
Euler was glad and appointed Li To-ta, with his third 
son, to the command of the expedition. The expedition 
was ordered to start for earth forthwith. 

After this the two commanders returned to their 
respective palaces, and divided the forces into 
three armies, and the Great Victorious Spirit led 
the vanguard. All the forces at once left the 
South Gate of Heaven and arrived at the Mountain 
Garden, where they encamped, ready for battle. When 
they reached the Waterfall Cave, they saw innumerable 
demons drilling with spears and swords as if in battle. 
The Great Victorious Spirit cried out, " You wild 
animals, go and announce to the Master of the Horse 
that I am a great commander sent to subdue this place. 
Tell him to come out at once and surrender, lest 
you all be destroyed." The demons flew into the Cave 
and cried, "Woe to us! Woe to us! Outside our 
entrance is one of the commanders from Heaven, who 
styles himself a holy official, and says he has come by 
the order of the Ruler of Heaven to subdue this place, 
and calls on you to come out at once and surrender, 
lest we all be destroyed." 



DECLINES BEING A STUD MASTER 53 

The Monkey King on hearing this, merely said, 
"Bring me my coat of mail." Pie put it on and took 
his magic beam in his hand, and ordered all to go outside 
and put themselves in battle arraj'. 

The Great Victorious Spirit screamed out, "You 
wretched monkey, do j-ou not know me, the Great Holy 
One, from the Board of Prince Li To-ta sent down from 
the gods above as the vanguard of the army? The Great 
Victorious Generals are sent down by the order of the 
Buler of Heaven to receive your submission. You had 
better jdeld at once, and submit to his mercy, lest j-ou 
perish. If j'ou hesitate a moment, you will be at once 
beaten to powder." When the Monkey King heard this, 
he became very angry and said, "You rotten hairy 
devil! You had better cease from your tall talk. I 
can easily kill you all with one blow, but as there would 
be none left to report the matter in Heaven , I will spare 
3'our life. But you must go back at once and say to the 
Kuler there, that he does not know how to engage worthy 
officers." The Great Victorious Spirit said, "You 
impudent monkey, you do not know me." Old Sun 
quickly replied, " What hairy spirit are you? Old Sun 
has never met you before, tell me your name at once ! 
I have infinite resource; how then did the Ruler send me 
merely to look after horses? Look at my banner. If he 
promotes me in accordance with my title, then I will not 
fight, and there will be peace in heaven and on earth. If 
not,then I will fight and besiege heaven itself and the thr- 
one of the Ruler of the Universe, and sit on the throne 
myself." When the great commander from heaven 
heard this and saw clearly on the banner outside the 



64 MISSION TO fiEAVEN 

Cave in great letters, "The Holy Oh6, the Eqtial of 
Heaven' he smiled and said; " You wretched morikey, 
do you, simple one, think yourself equal to the Glorious 
Ruler of Heaven, and call yourself the Holy One, the 
Equal of Heaven? Very well then, just have & taste of 
my battle-axe." With this he aimed to split his head, 
but the Monkey King parried his blow with his magic 
beam. The gi'eat commander from heaven was no 
match for him, and his head was badly hurt by the 
Monkey King. He then took the handle of his axe and 
broke it in two, and ran away for his life. The Morikey 
King laughed and said; " You coward, I forgive you. 
Hasten back to heaven and report. ' ' 

The great commander returned to the camp, saw 
Prince Li To-ta, knelt and said ; ' ' The Master of the 
Horse certainly has immense magic power. I was no 
match for him and was beaten. Punish me as you 
Hke." Prince Li became angry and said; " For this 
inability, you must be beheaded." Then his son, 
Prince Na-to stepped forward and begged the Prince 
his father not to be angry, but to forgive the Great 
Victorious Spirit. " Let me go forth and lead the forces 
once, then we shall know the truth about the matter. ' ' 
The heavenly Prince being persuaded, ordered the general 
to return to the camp to await punishment. Prince 
Na-to, clad in full armour, then jumped out of the 
camp, and on arriving at the Waterfall Cave, found the 
Searcher of Secrets drilling his soldiers. 

Seeing Prince Na-to coming up with a rush, the 
Monkey King went up to him and said ; ' ' Whose little boy 
are you, daring to com6 to my cave, and what is your 



DECLINES BEING A STUD MASTER 55 

business?" Na4o replied; "You wretched monkej' 
naonster, know that I aoa the third son of the great 
Prince of Heaven, Li To-ta, who has now been ordered by 
the Ruler of Heaven to Qome ^nd arrest you." The 
Sea,rcher of Secrets smiled and said; "Young Prince, 
you have not yet shed your milk teeth, nor the down in 
which you were born, how da,r^ yoij engage in this 
tall talk? But I will spare your life. Look at what is 
inscribed on my banner on the flagstaff. When I go to 
the Ruler of Heaven it will be with that rank. I will 
then go, and there will be no need to trouble our armies 
to fight. If not, I shall certainly take my armies and 
besiege Heaven itself. " Na-to lifted his head and saw 
in great big letters, * The Great Holy One, the Equal of 
Heaven.' ' What great magic power this monkey must 
have, to dare to use this banner ' bethought. "Are 
you not afraid to have a taste of my sword?" The 
Searcher said, " I will stand still and let you strike 
with your sword as you wish." Na-to got very angrj', 
made a great shout, "Transform," and he was chang- 
ed, having three heads and six arms. With a fierce 
look he held a different kind of weapon in each of the 
six hands, one instrument to behead the monster, a 
second to cut him down, a third to bind him, a fourth 
to beat him, a fifth a silken ball and the sixth a large 
fork with which to rush on him. When the Searcher 
saw this, he was afraid and said, " This little boy 
after all has some skill. It would not be out of place to 
show him my skill." The Searcher then cried out, 
" Transform," and in an instant he also had three heads 
and six arms, had multiplied his magic spear into three, 
and with his six hands grasped them. 



56 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Then they fell to and fought. It was truly like an 
earthquake when these mighty spirits battled for thirty 
rounds. The six instruments of the prince were multi- 
plied into ten thousand. Sun, the Searcher, therefore 
multiplied his magic spears into ten thousand. In fact, 
it seemed as if a shower of shooting stars were falling, 
and it was difficult to know which would be victor. But 
the Searcher of Secrets was quick of eye and skilful of 
hand. In the thick of the battle, he pulled out a hair 
and called out, " Transform," and in an instant he was 
changed into his original form, and held the magic 
spear in his hand and made for Na-to. The prince tried 
to parry the thrust, but he Avas struck by the spear on 
the back of his head and on his left arm. With great 
pain he fled, having been completely beaten, and 
returned to camp. 

At this the great Prince Li To-ta was greatly alarmed, 
changed colour and said, "How can we withstand this 
kind of magic ?" The young prince replied, "Outside 
his cave there is a flagstafl: -ivith a banner on which is 
written in large letters, — "The Great Holy One, the 
Equal of Heaven." This name he boasts, and says that 
the Heavenlj- Ruler must recognise him as an equal, 
and then there will be no trouble at all. If the Ruler 
refuses, then he will certainly fight, even up to the Court 
of Heaven." The Great Prince Li To-ta said, "Since 
matters are so bad, on no account have anji.hing to do 
with him just now, but let us return to Heaven and 
report and ask for more legions to subdue him." 

So they departed for Heaven. The Monkey King, 
after his victory, returned to the Mountain Garden, and 



DECLINES BEING A STUD MASTER 57 

the seventy-two demon kings and the six brothers all 
came to congratulate him. Then they drank and 
rejoiced in the cave. The monkey king, sitting opposite 
the six brothers said, " Since my title now is, The Great 
Holy One, the Equal of Heaven, you also shall be known 
as the Great Holy Ones." The Ox demon king cried out, 
' ' What you say is most reasonable. I myself shall be 
The Great Holy ^One, Victorious over Heaven." The 
Crocodile demon king said, " I shall be The Great Holy 
One of the Sea." The Roc demon king said, "I 
shall be known as, "The Great Holy One who 
rebelled in Heaven." The Lion demon king said, "And 
I shall be the Great Holy One who removed mountains." 
The Gorilla Demon King said, "And I The Great 
Holj' One who penetrated all things." Another demon 
king said, " I shall be The Great Holy One who drove 
away the gods." Thus the seven Great Holy Ones took 
names to themselves and titles just as the}' pleased, and 
played together all day. 

Meanwhile Li, the Heavenlj' Prince, had returned 
with his third son to Heaven,' and memorialized thus, 
" We, your ministers, by your command, led forth an 
army to subdue the monster Searcher of Secrets, but as 
we did not know that his magic power was so great, we did 
not overcome him. We therefore hope Your Majesty 
will add more heavenly hosts to destroy him." The 
Ruler of Heaven said, " How can one monkey demon 
have such ability that you need an additional force ? ' ' 
Then the third son said, " I hope Your Majesty will 
forgive your minister, and not put him to death. That 
Monkey demon had an iron spear with which he first 



68 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

put to flight the Great Victorious Commander. Then he 
wounded me in my arm. At the entrance of his cave 
he has hoisted a flag on which is written in large letters 
' The Holy One, the Equal of Heaven.' He says if you 
give him this position and title, he will cease fighting ; 
but if not, he will lay siege to Heaven itself. ' ' The Ruler 
of Heaven, hearing this, was much astonished and said, 
" How dare he be so mad as that ?" and ordered all the 
generals to go and destroy him at once. Just as he 
spoke, the Minister of the planet Venus stepped out of 
the ranks and said, " That Monkey demon only knows 
how to make big demands, but does not know how far 
he can go. If you send more heavenly legions to fight 
him, they will not subdue him easily, so it will cause 
great trouble to the army. Would it not be better that 
you should pardon him, and send an edict, granting him 
the title that he asks ? But let it be only an empty title, 
Avithout any emolument." The Rvder of Heaven said, 
' ' What do you mean by that ?" " Let him come and take 
up his abode in Heaven," said the minister, " so that his 
ambition satisfied, he may no longer create disturbance: 
and Heaven and Earth may be at peace." The Ruler, 
having heard this, granted the request. He ordered that 
an edict be written, and that the minister of Venus should 
take it to the Monkey King. The minister, therefore, 
left the South Gate of Heaven and came to the Mountain 
Garden and the Waterfall Cave. 

When he came near, things looked very different 
from what they had done on his previous visit. There 
were great displays and an appearance of deadly 
earnestness. Every one of the demons had a spear and 



DECLINES BEING A STUD MASTER 69 

stvord, and all -were shouting and running about. As 
soon as they saw the Minister of the Planet Venus, they 
approached as if in fright. But he said, " Wait a 
little. Go tell your Great Holy One that I am an 
ambassador from God himself, and have an invitation 
from Him to your chief. ' ' 

The Monkeys ran and told their king what 
had happened. The Searcher of Secrets said, " I am 
glad he has come, I am glad he has come. He is probably 
the Minister of Venus, who came here before, and through 
whom I was invited to go above and occupy a position 
that was far too low. Since he comes again, it must be 
for good." Then he ordered all his chiefs to unfurl 
their banners, beat their drums and put themselves in 
battle array to receive him. The Great Holy One with 
helmet on his head and clothed in armourcameoutof the 
Cave and made obeisance, crying out, "Ancient minister, 
please come in. ' ' He came in and stood with his face 
turned towards the South and said, "Now I must 
announce to the Great Holy One that since you despised 
the low position, as Master of the Horse, assigned 
to you and left your office, the Euler of Heaven, 
knowing this, says that as all officials begin with inferior 
positions and rise step hj step, you should not have 
rejected the position because it was low. The Heavenly 
Prince Li and his son were sent down to arrest you . They 
have returned saying that you, Great Holy One, have 
put up a standard, claiming to be the Equal of Heaven. 
All the generals of Heaven wanted to come down 
and fight, but I excused you and exerted my 
influence on behalf of your Great Holiness, so as 



60 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

to avoid the mobilization of the troops. I begged the 
Ruler to give you an appointment. This he granted. 
Hence I am come to invite you." The Searcher of Se- 
crets smiled and said, " Once before you troubled yourself 
on my behalf. Now j-ou do so again. Very many 
thanks to you. But I did not know that there was such a 
position in Heaven as * Great Holy One, the Equal of 
Heaven.' " The Mnister of "N'enus replied, " My request 
was that you should be appointed to that post, and it has 
been granted. That is why I come to invite you. Put away 
all j-our doubts." The Searcher was greatly delighted, 
and invited him to a banquet, but he could not delay. 

Therefore together they mounted the clouds and 
reached the South Gate of Heaven, All the generals of the 
heavenly legions presented aims to receive them. Then 
they went straight to the Throne Room and the minister of 
Venus fell on his knees and said, " Your minister, in 
obedience to your command, went for j'our Master of the 
Horse, Sun the Searcher of Secrets, and he has arriv- 
ed." The Iluler said, " Sim, Searcher of Secrets, come 
here. I have now appointed you to be the Great Holy 
One, the Equal of Heaven, of the highest rank. Here I 
expect you to act worthily." The Monkey King only 
faced the Euler and said, "Yes, I thank j'ou." The 
Ruler then commanded two officials to erect a mansion 
for him on the right side of the Peach Orchard and to put 
up a tablet inscribed, ' The Mansion of the Great Holy 
One, the Equal of Heaven.' To wait upon the Monkey 
King in the mansion two officials were ajjpointed, with a 
number of servants to wait upon each. The Ruler also 
sent the Minister of the Five Pole Stars to accompany 




The Angel op the Stai: Ven'U; 



DECLINES BEING A STUD MASTER 61 

him tohis new palace, presenting him with two big jars of 
wine and ten golden flowers. He told the Monkey King 
to have his mind at rest, to live at peace and not to leave 
his post again. The Monkey King received this envoy, 
and that very day went with the Minister of the Five 
Pole Stars to his mansion, where he opened the wine 
jars so that all might drink and rejoice together. 

The Minister of the Five Pole Stars then returned 
to his own place, and the Monkey King was full of hap- 
piness, rejoicing in his heavenly mansion, without care 
of any sort. Truly it was : 

God in rank and lasting life, 
Nevermore to tread the round 
Of endless transmigration. 

What happened after this you will learn in the 
next chapter. 



CHAPTER V. 

UPSETS THE PEACH BANQUET 

The Robbery of tlie Peaches and the Pills of 
Immortality. 

Ijavrless behaviour in Heaven. All the gods 
ordered to arrest the Demon. 

The Gre^it Holy One having been given the title of 
the Equal of Heaven, was not certain of the degree of his 
official rank. But he had two angels serving him in his 
palace all day long. They had nothing to do but to eat 
their three meals a day, and to sleep all night. The 
Equal of Heaven had perfect freedom to visit Jiis friends 
in the palaces and to make new friends. When meeting 
the Three Pure Ones, he styled himself 'Lao-tze' (your 
son?) and when visiting the four Rulers he called him- 
self, ' Your minister. ' When meeting the Angels of 
the nine Bright Stars, the Generals of the five Regions, 
the Angels of the twenty-eight Constellations, the four 
Great Celestial Angels, the twelve Morning stars, the 
Elders of the five Regions, all the stars of Heaven, and the 
gods of the Milky Way, he addressed them all as 
brethren. 

One day he went to the East, another day to the 
West, mounting on the clouds without any fixed purpose. 
Then one day at the morning audience of the Celestial 
Emperor, there came forward an angel named Yang who 
held a flag and said to the Emperor. " There is that 
Equal of Heaven daily wandering about without 



UPSETS THE PEACH BANQUET 63 

anything to do. It is to be feared that some day trouble 
will arise. It will be better to give him some work to 
do." 

The Celestial Emperor th^n summoned the Monkey 
King, who gladly cam« forward, saying, " Your Majesty 
has called Old Sun. What honour are you about to con- 
fer on him?" The Emperor replied, "I see you have 
nothing to do, I therefore appoint j-ou to a special ser- 
vice, to guard the Peach (k'Chard." The Great Holy 
One joyfully thajiked him and retired. 

He then went to iook at the Peach Orchard. Ser- 
vants were there who refused to admit him asking, 
" Where docs the Great Holy One wish to go?" He re- 
plied, " I have been appointed by the Emperor to take 
charge of the Peach Orchard, and have come to see it." 

Then the servants called the others, and all kowtow- 
ed to him, l^,dinghim in to the Orchard. It was full 
of magnificent trees -with fine branches. They were not 
common trees, but had been planted by the <5ueeii of 
Heaven. The Great Holy One, after admiring them for a 
long time asked the .servants the number of the trees. 
They replied, " The first row has three thousand six 
hundred trees, their blossoms and fruit are small. They 
take three thousand years to ripen. If men eat the fruit 
they become immortal and can understand the laws of 
natvure. Their constitutions will become strong. The 
middle row has twelve hundred trees, bearing more 
blossom and sweeter fruit. They take six thousand 
years to xipen. If a man eat of them he can ascend to 
the heavens floating like a cloud, and can hve for ever 
without getting old. The third row has also twelve 



64 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

hundred trees with red fruit and small stones. It takes 
nine thousand years for these to ripen. "When a man 
has eaten of them, he will live as long as the heaven and 
earth, and attain the same age as the sun and moon." 

AVhen the Great Holy One heard this, he rejoiced 
exceedingly. After examining the trees with great care, he 
returned to his palace, and every few days he went to 
Orchard without visiting his friends or wandering on the 
clouds. One day, seeing the peaches ripe on the trees of 
the third row, he was anxious to taste them, but alas! 
the labourers in the Orchard and his own servants were 
all in attendance on him. So he thought how he could 
get rid of them, and said, "You can all leave me, I 
am going to rest awhile here." So they all went out. 
Then the Monkey King took off his oflScial robes and 
climbed up the great trees. He picked the ripest peaches, 
sat on the branches and at« his fill. After this he jumped 
down, donned his clothes, and called for his servants to 
accompany him to his own palace. 

After a few days, he went again to the Orchard to 
get fruit to his heart's content. Now it happened that 
the Queen of Heaven had a birthday that day, and had 
provided a great banquet in one of her palaces on the 
lake. This was called the Peach Banquet, and for this 
she sent seven companies of fairies in various uni- 
forms of red, blue, grey, black, purple, yellow and green, 
ornamented with flowers on their heads, to gather 
peaches from the orchard. The seven companies of 
fairies arrived at the orchard and found the servants 
watching at the gate. They said, "We have come by 
order of the Queen of Heaven to fetch peaches for 




Siti Wan^g Mu — The Queen of Heaven- 



UPSETS THE PEACH BANQUET 65 

the Peach Banquet." The servants replied, " Just 
wait a little. This year is not the same as before. The 
Celestial Emperor has appointed the Great Holy One, the 
Equal of Heaven, to guard the orchard. "We must go 
in and announce you to him." 

The fairies asked, "Where is lie?" The servants 
replied, " He is inside the orchard sleeping in the pavi- 
lion." 

" Go and fetch him and be quick about it," ordered 
the fairies. The servants went on to the pavilion, but 
could not find him. His clothes were there, but he was 
gone. 

It happened that the Great Holy One, after eating 
some peaches, had suddenly transformed himself into a 
man only two inches in height, and was sleeping amongst 
the leaves on one of the branches of a tree. The servants 
returned to say they could not find him. The seven com- 
panies of fairies replied, " We came in obedience to the 
Queen's command. How can we go back empty-handed?" 

Some of the servants standing by said, " Since you 
fairies have come in obedience to the Queen, and there 
is no doubt of her command, you had better go in and 
pluck the peaches yourselves. The Great Holy One must 
have wandered out of the orchard to visit his friends." 

They went in and found very few peaches and those 
that were there were hairy and green . The Monkey had 
eaten all the ripe ones. The fairies looked East and 
AVest and only on the South found a few partly red and 
partly white. The blue fairies pulled a branch down. , 
It was on this branch that the Great Sage was sleeping. 
The red fairies picked the fruit and then let go of the 



66 HUSSION TO HEAVEN 

branch. This sudden jerk woke the Great Holy One and 
he resumed his original natural size. He pulled out of his 
ear the steel needle, which grew as large as a beam, and 
cried out fiercely, ' ' What fiends you are to dare to come 
and steal mj'' peaches!" 

At this sight the seven bands of fairies fell down 
on their knees and begged him not to be angry, saj'ing, 
" We are not fiends, but are fairies sent by the Queen of 
Heaven to get peaches for her banquet. When we arrived , 
you could not be found anywhere. Fearing to be late, 
we came in to pick some fruit. Pray forgive us." 

On hearing this the Holy One ceased his anger and 
smiled, saying, " Rise, who is it that the Q.ueen of 
Heaven has invited to the Banquet?" 

The fairies replied, "Those invited are, according to 
ancient custom, Buddha of the Western Heaven and his 
disciples, the Pusas and the Lohans, Kwanyin of the 
Southern Ocean, Tsung En, Emperor of the East, the 
Shen or Taoist angel of the ten Provinces and three Is- 
lands, and Hsuan Ling, the dark Ruler of the Nortli 
Pole, the great j^ellow Shen or angels of the Centre 
who are the five elders of the five Regions. Besides 
these, are the Pr'ince of the five Northern stai-s, the 
angels of the upper eight Caves, the Three Pure Ones, 
four Rulers and the great Shen called Tai Yi. There 
are also Yu Huang and the gods of the nine Mountains 
and seas of the ^Middle eight Caves, the god of Hell: 
the dark teacher of the lower eight Caves, the spirits 
of the earth, and the honoured ones of every palace 
in Heaven. Tliese all meet at the banquet to con- 
gratulate the Queen." 



UPSETS THE PEACH BANQUET 67 

The Holy One laughed and asked, "Am I invited?" 
The fairies replied that they did not know. 

The Holy One said, "I am the Great Holy One, 
the Equal of Heaven. Why should not I, Old Sun, 
have been invited among the honoured guests?" 

" These are those invited in the jjast. We do not 
know who are invited now," replied the fairies. 

" I do not blame you" he said. "Wait a little 
and let me, Old Sun, go and enquire," The Great Holy 
One then pronounced a spell towards the fairies and said, 
" Stop, stop, stop," and in this way fixed the bodj' of 
each of the seven companies of the beautifully robed 
fairies. The}^ turned the Avhites of their eyes and stood 
transfixed in the peach orchard. The Great Holy One 
then mounted a cloud and came out of the orchard and 
directed his course towards the celestial lake. As he was 
going, he saw before him a bare-footed angel. The Great 
Holy One l)ent his head and decided to play a trick. 
He asked the angel where he was going. He replied ; 
•^ I have been invited by the Queen of Heaven to the 
Peach Banquet." The Great Holy One said, " You do 
not know, Sir, that the Celestial Emperor has ordered 
me to inount on the clouds and instruct the guests, who 
come from all directions, to go first to the Tung Ming 
Hall to learn their proper places at the banquet." The 
.a,ngel who was a noble saint and did not doubt his 
words, turned and directed his course towards the Tung 
Ming Hall. 

The Great Holy One mounted a cloud and repeated an 
incantation to change his body. He was at once changed 
into the likeness of the bare-footed angel, and directing 



68 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

his course to the Imperial lake, soon got to the 
Banqueting Hall and finally entered inside. There he 
saw carnation incense coiled round, princely red batons 
with embroidered silks . In front were arranged the nine 
pink phcenix feathers and eight precious purple seats; on 
the table were disbes of dragons, liver, phoenix' marrow, 
bears' feet, monkeys' lips, a hundred different things, 
strange fruit and fine dishes, everything new and fresh. 
All were arranged in perfect order, but as yet no guests 
had arrived. TheGreatHoIy One noted everything. Sud- 
denly he smelt some wine, turned round quickly and saw 
several jars of carnation sauce and sweet fermented 
spirits under cover of the right partition, so that hia 
mouth watered and he wanted to taste it. But alas, 
those that served the wine were all in attendance. He 
therefore used his magic, plucked a few hairs, put them 
in his mouth and chewed them small and pronounced 
an incantation saying, "Change!" and the bits of hair 
were all changed into sleeping insects which flew on the 
men's faces and soon their hands were limj) and their 
heads heavy and all fell into a deep sleep. 

The Great Ploly One then tasted those fine dishes, went 
to the right partition where the wine jars were, opened 
them and drank till he became drunk. Then he said to 
himself, ' ' This will never do, for the guests will soon 
arrive and I shall not be surprised if they arrest me. 
What shall I do? It is better that I should return to 
my home and have a sleep." So he strolled away, but 
lost his Avay, and instead of getting to his own palace he 
got into the Teu Suai mansion, from whence the spirits 
start from heaven to become incarnate on earth. At the 



-^A^^K^^^i^ 




The ]Moxkey Upsets the Peach Banquet by means 
OF Sleeping Insects. 



UPSETS THE PEACH BANQUET 69 

sight of this he suddenly became sober and thought, 
' The Teu Suai mansion is above the thirty-three 
heavens, and is the home of the Ancient of Daj's. How 
liave I made this mistake? Never mind, I wanted to 
come and see this place and have never succeeded, now 
that I am here I may as well take tlie opportunity' and 
see it. ' 

So he straightened his clothes and went in, but 
there was not a soul present, for the Ancient of Days 
and the most Ancient Buddha Yen-teng (Creator of 
Light) were preaching in the three-storied vermilUon 
palace above and all the ministering sjjirits were 
in attendance. The Great Holy One went in to the 
Immorta,! Pill room in search of some one, but could 
not find anyone. He saw beside the crucible, where the 
pills were prepared, five gourds. These five gourds were 
filled with Immoi-tal Pills already made. The Great 
Holjr One was very glad and said, *' These are the most 
precious things of the Immortals. I, Old Sun, since I 
received religion, can see through things and I wish 
to prepare some pills to help men, but I have no time 
at home. To-day providentially I have hit upon these 
pills. As the Ancient of Days is not at home, 
let me eat a few of these." So he turned the pills 
out of the gourds and swallowed them all as he would 
have swallowed some peas. With the pills and the 
wine working in him he did not feel comfortable, and 
said, " If the Celestial Ruler is disturbed I shall fear 
for my life. I^t me go, go, go. It is better for me to go 
down and be a King upon earth. " So he ran out of the 
Teu Suai mansion. He had not gone far froni the 



70 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

western gate of Heaven before he made himseK invisible,, 
got on the clouds and returned to his old home in the 
mountain. 

Then he shouted out, " My little ones, I have return- 
ed." They all knelt and cried out, * ' You , Great Holy One , 
have been very thoughtless of us, j-ou have left us for so 
long a time without coming back." He replied, "Not 
long, not long," and as he spoke he walked on and went 
far into the cave. When the four generals had kowtowed 
before him, they said, " Great Holy One, you have been 
in Heaven for a hundred years, what honours have you 
received?" TheGreat Holy One laughed and said, 'It 
seems to me only six months siiice I left j-ou. Why do 
you speak of a hundred yeai-s'?" The generals said,. 
"One day in heaven is equal to one year on earth." 
The Great Holy One said, "I am glad to tell you that the 
Celestial Emperor was kind to me this time, and gave 
me the title of being Equal to Heaven itself, and let me 
live in the palace of the Equal of Heaven, and I had sub- 
ordinates to serve me. Seeing that I had nothing to do, he 
appointed me to look after the Peach Orchard. Then, 
followed the great Banquet of the Queen of Heaven.. 
Because I was not invited to it, I went to the Royal 
Lake Palace where the banquet was to be held, and find- 
ing none of the guests had arrived and that everything 
had been prepared and all the dishes laid out, I 
stealthily tasted them and drank the wine. On leaving 
I missed the way, and got into the Mansion of the 
Ancient of Days, where I found five gourds full of the 
Pills of Immortality. These I also stealthily swalloM-ed. 
Fearing that the Celestial Emperor might find fault with 



UPSETS THE PEACH BANQUET 71 

me, I left Heaven altogether and returned here. ' ' 

On hearing this, all the little monkej-demons 
greatly rejoiced and prepared refreshments in honour of 
his return, and gave him a bowl of cocoanut wine. He 
tasted it; then made a wry face and said, " It is not good, 
not good. This morning I enjoyed myself in the Royal 
Lake Palace where on the side of the dining hall was 
abundance of a delicious carnation sauce, which you have 
never seen. When I go there again I will take a few 
jars and bring them home to you so that you maj- taste 
it and each become immortal." All the monkeys rejoiced 
beyond measure. The Great Hoh'^ One then went out of 
the cave, jumped and made himself invisible and made 
straight for the Peach Banquet Hall. When he got there 
he found all the wine-servers still asleep, so he took 
up two jars, one under the. right arm and the other un- 
der the left, and two others, one in each hand, and, 
mounting a cloud, he returned to the cave and sensed 
the monkeys vnth. the wine of the immortals, which 
greatly delighted all. 

Now the seven companies of fairies, since they had 
been turned into immovable statues, were not able to 
move for twentj'-four hours. When they awoke again 
thej' took up their baskets and returned to the Queen, who 
asked them, " How many peaches have you brought?" 
They i:epl led, "We have only two baskets full of small 
peaches, and three baskets full of the middle size. When 
we got to the best peach trees there were no peaches left, 
for the Great Holy One had eaten them all. "When we 
Avere looking for him, he suddenly appeared before us. 
He was very angry and was about to beat us. Then lie 



72 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

asked for whom you were providing this banquet. 
After that, bj- some magic, he made us all immovable so 
that we could not stir until now. " The Queen, on hearing 
this, went to the Celestial Emperor and told him every- 
thing. Just as she had finished, the wine servers and the 
officials came and reported that some one, whom they did 
not know had upset all the banquet, had secretly drunk 
all the fine wine, and eaten all the dishes. 

Then the four great generals announced that 
the Ancient of Days had arrived. The Emperor and 
Queen went out to meet him. After having saluted, he 
said, " I had prepared five gourds of Immortal Pills to 
present to you at your great Banquet. Unfortunately a 
thief came and stole them, so I have come to explain." 
The Emperor, on hearing this, was alarmed. Shortly 
after, there came a messenger from the palace of the 
Equal of Heaven, who kowtowed and said, " Sun, the 
Great Holy One, does not attend to his business. He 
went out yesterday and has not come back, and we do not 
know where he has gone." The Emperor was still more 
alarmed. Then the bare-footed angel said, " Having re- 
ceived the Queen's invitation to the Banquet, I met the 
Great Holy One, the Equal of Heaven, who told me that 
the Emperor had ordered us to go to the Tung Ming 
Hall, to learn our proper places before proceeding to the 
Banquet Hall. So I turned round and went to the Tung 
Ming Hall, but I did not see your Majesty there, so I 
hastened and came here." The Emperor was greatly 
alarmed and said. "This was a false order, deceiving 
my guests. Make haste and call the police superintendent, 
and make enquiries about the footsteps of this messenger. " 



UPSETS THE PEACH BANQUET 73 

The superintendent went out and made enquiries 
■everywhere. Then he reported and said, " The disturber 
of the Celestial guests is none other than the Great Holy 
One, the Equal of Heaven, " and he then told the story of 
all his doings. His Majesty was very angrj', and ordered 
the four Princes of Heaven together with Prince Li and 
his son Na-to to call the roll of the officers of the twenty- 
eight constellations and the nine bright stars, the five 
morning stars, the examiners of the five legions, the great 
rulers, four eminent officials, the angels of the East and 
West and the spirits of the North and Souths the guardians 
of the five mountains and all the stars of Heaven, 
altogether a hundred thousand heavenly hosts, to go 
down to earth and surround the Fruit Garden in the 
Mountain and seize the Monkey. 

All the hosts of heaven arranged themselves in order 
to leave heaven. Prince Li gave orders that all should 
encamp around the mountain Fruit Garden, and let no 
water go into it. In all there were eighteen regiments. 
The officers of the nine bright stars were sent first. They 
surrounded the cave outside, yelling out, "Where is the 
Oreat Holy One ? We have been sent from heaven. We 
are heavenlj' hosts sent down to take you. Submit yourself 
at once ! If you hesitate in the least, we shall annihilate 
you all." The little monkey demons were frightened 
and ran in saying, ' ' Outside there are nine fierce spirits, 
who say that they have been sent as messengers from 
Heaven to capture the Great Holy One. They are 
cursing and swearing outside the gate." At that time 
the Great Holj' One was drinking wine with his four 
great generals. Though he heard these words, he paid no 



74 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

attention to them and said, "This morning we have 
wine and we will get our fill, and never mind what is 
outside." Before they had finished speaking, a whole 
crowd of little monkeys rushed in and cried, "Grand- 
father, the nine fierce gods have broken through the 
gate and are rushing in and killing all before them." 

The Great Holy One was very angr3', ordered his 
commander-in-chief, "Lead out twenty-two generals of 
the monkey-demons to fight. I, Old Sun, and my four 
bodj'-guards will follow." Then the commander-in- 
chief led them out to meet the enemy and the nine fierce 
officers annihilated them all before they came to the iron 
bridge. In the midst of the strife there, the Great Holy 
One arrived with his iron spear and, throwing aside his 
armour, came out to fight, crying, " Make way for 
me ! " At the sight all the nine officer fell back, arranged 
themselves in battle arraj' and said, " You foolhardy 
man, are you not afraid of death? You have com- 
mitted ten crimes. First you stole the peaches, then you 
stole mne, then you upset the banquet, aftervrards you 
stole the Pills of Immortality, then j-ou stole the 
Imperial wine, and here you are enjoying yourself with 
these things. Are you not aware that you have com- 
mitted crime upon crime? " ' The Great Holy One laughed 
and said, " It is true that I have committed these things. 
What do you want?" The nine stars replied, "We 
have come by order of his Celestial Majesty ; you must 
submit youi-self at once, lest the lives of all these should 
be imperilled. ' ' The Great Holy One was very angry and 
said, " What sti-eugth have your gods of straw, that you 
dare to talk like this? Just have a taste of Old Sun's 



UPSETS THE PEACH BANQUET 75 

Ijeam ! ' ' The nine officers closed up together. Then the 
Beautiful Monkej' King brandished his steel club and 
the nine officers fought with him -with all their might 
until they were tired, and one by one they turned round 
and dragged their weapons after them, until the}' were 
all vanquished. 

They hurried back to the central tent in the camp,, 
and said to To-ta the Celestial Prince, " That Monkey 
King is certainly wonderfully strong, we are no match 
for him, and have had to retreat before him." 

Prince Li called for the four Celestial Princes and the 
officers of the twenty -eight constellations all to come forth 
and fight. Still the Great Holy One seemed to have no 
fear, but sent forth his commander-in-chief and seventy- 
two of his demon-generals from the cave, and his, four 
generals, and arranged them in order of battle outside 
the cave mouth. There was a wonderful battle which 
lasted from morning until sunset. The commander- 
in-chief and seventy-two generals of the cave demons 
were all seized. But the four genemls and the hosts of 
monkeys hid themselves in the cave inside the waterfall. 
The Great Holy One with his iron club stopped the 
four heavenly generals and fought most fiercely with 
To-ta and Na-to in the air for a long time. Then, seeing 
that it was getting dark, he plucked a bunch of hair, 
chewed it small, and blew it forth, crying out, 
"Change," and it was changed into a hundred 
thousand Great Holy Ones, each with an iron club, and 
so they beat back Prince Na-to and drove back the four 
Celestial generals of Heaven. 

When the Great Holy One had gained the victory, he 



76 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

■called back the scattered hair and returned to his cave. 
Then were seen ou the iron bridge (he four generals lead- 
ing their followers to welcome the Great Holy One. They 
-groaned three times in sorrow and tears, then three times 
they broke forth into cheers and laughter. The Great 
Holy One said, " AVhy do you come and greet me both 
weeping and laughing?" The generals said, "Think- 
ing of the battle this morning, when our seventy-two 
•generals and commander-in-chief were all taken by the 
Celestial hosts and we only escaped alive, we could not but 
weep, but now seeing our Great Hoh' One return after his 
victory without a scratch on him, we are lilled with 
laughter." The Holy One replied, " Victory and failure 
-are common things among soldiers, why should you be 
in distress? Only let us be on our guard, let us have 
something to eat, then we can sleep and be refreshed- 
In the morning I will show you a great miracle, I will 
take these celestial hosts and have my revenge ou them." 
Then all the monkejs retired to sleep. 

The four celestial Princes called back their soldiers 
after the battle and rewarded them according to their 
respective merits. They had seized tigers and leojmrds 
And wolves without number, but had not got a single 
monkey amongst them. Those who toiled hard were 
rewarded, and all the companies of soldiere were thick 
like bees, and were called together to surround the 
Mountain Garden, only waiting for the daj'light to begin 
the great battle. All were on the watch to hear the 
•command of the Prince. How it took place you shall 
learn in the next chapter. 



CHAPTER VI. 
THE GREAT HOLY ONE CAPTURED 

Kwanyin attends the banquet and enquires^ 
the cause of the trouble. 

The Divine Kinsman with might subdues the 
Great Holy One. 

We will not now discuss how the heavenly host 
besieged the cave nor how the Great Holy One rested, 
but will tell of Kwanj'in of Potala, who arrived by 
the Southern Sea from the mouth of the Indus. 

After Kwanyin had been invited bj' the Queen 
of Heaven to the banquet, she and her chief Buddhist 
disciple, Hui An or Mu-to, a sou of Prince Li, went 
together to the Royal Lake Palace, where they saw 
the Banqueting Hall in the greatest disorder.. 
Although some guests had arrived, none of them 
were sitting down, but all were discussing matters- 
very seriously. After Kwanyin and the rest had greeted 
each other, the Taoist Shen told tliem everj'thing 
that had taken place. Kwanyin said, "Since there is 
no banquet, pray come with me to see his Celestial 
Majesty." So all followed her to the Tung Ming Hall. 
There the four great bare-footed Shen or Taoist saints re- 
ceived them. Kwanyin said, "I wish to see the Celestial 
Ruler, may I trouble you to announce us?" The angel 
Kiuhung Chi went into the Ling Yuen Hall to know if 
they might enter. At the same time the Ancient of Days 
accompanied by the Queen of Heaven went there also.. 



78 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Kwanyin then led bar followers in. After having paid 
their respects, and haviug greeted the Ancient of Daj's 
and the Queen of Heaven, they all sat down and asked 
about the Peach Banquet. The Celestial Emperor 
said, "Once a year we meet together for a happy ban- 
quet, but this year that monkey-de\nl has upset every- 
thing. On this account I am greatly troubled, and have 
therefoi-e sent a hundred thousand of the hosts of heaven 
•down to earth to capture him. To-day I have not receiv- 
ed any report and do not know whether there has been a 
victory or not." When Kwanyin heard this, she ordei*- 
«d Hui An to leave Heaven at once and go down to the 
Mountain Garden and enquire about the battle, and 
added, "If the two parties should be about equal in 
strength, j'ou must give a helping hand to the celestial 
hosts and return quickly with the tidings. ' ' 

Hui An straightened his clothes and, taking an iron 
staff in his hand, mounted a cloud and went straight 
to the mountain, which he saw covered with soldiere, 
regiment upon regiment. Then he called upon the 
gate-keeper of the camp to announce his arrival, 
saying, "I am Kwanyin 's chief disciple, Hui An, Son 
of Prince Li, sent to enquire how the battle goes on." 
Prince Li sent him a flag and invited him to enter. 
When Hui An saw the four celestial generals and Prince 
Li, he fell on his knees and paid his respects. The 
celestial Prince asked, " Mj^ son, M-hd'e do you come 
from?" He replied, " I came with Kwanyin to attend 
the Peach Banquet, but when we arrived and saw every- 
thing in disorder, Kwanyin led all the guests to see the 
Celestial Emperor. He told us how he had sent a host 



THE GREAT HOLY ONE CAPTUEED 79 

to subjugate the monkey-devils, but had not received any 
tidings as to the progress of the war, consequently 
Kwanyin sent me do^ni here to make enquiries and re- 
port." The Celestial Prince then told him all about the 
previous day's battle. Before he had finished speaking, 
there appeared a man outside the gate, saying that the 
Great Holy One had led out a whole army of monkeys 
ready for battle. The four great angels of Heaven and 
Prince Li then discussed how to send soldiers to meet 
them. Mu-to said, " Father, since Kwanyin has ordered 
me to come down to make enquiries and render help in 
case of need, I am ready to go and see what kind of being 
this Great Holy One is." The Celestial Prince said, 
"My son, you must be very careful." 

The son seized his iron staff, jumped outside the gate 
and shouted out, ' 'Which is the Great Holy One, the Equal 
of Heaven?" The Great Holy One replied, " It is I, Old 
Sun. Who are you that dares to ask me?" Mu-to said, 
" I am the second son of the Celestial Prince Li, my 
Buddhist name is Hui An and I am a disciple of Kwan- 
yin, ' ' The Great Holy One said, "Why do you come here 
instead of practising religion at j'^our home in the Southern 
ocean?" Mu-to replied, "I have been sent by my teacher 
to enquire about the war, and to see that these ferocious 
monkeys are captured." The Great Holy One said, ' ' How 
darej'ou talk like this to me? Wait till you have a taste 
of old Sun's club. ' ' Mu-to took his iron staff to meet him, 
and there on the side of the mountain, outside the camp, 
the two fought several bouts with each other. Hui An , 
being no match for his enemy, was beaten and fled. The 
Great Holy One gathered his monkey-soldiers and put 



80 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

them in battle array outside the cave. Meanwhile, Mu-to 
had alreadj' gone inside the camp, and said breathlessly 
to his father, " This Great Holy One is most wonderful, 
his powers are really marvellous, I could not vanquish him 
and had to retreat before him. " The Prince was alarmed 
at this and ordered a memorial to be written and sent to 
Heaven requesting help. He then sent one of the 
great royal kings, with his sou Mu-to, with this 
memorial to Heaven. 

When Hui An met Kwanj-in, he told her the evil 
tidings that thej' had been beaten. The Celestial 
Emperor opened the memorial and, seeing that it was 
a request for help, smiled and said, "What shall we do 
with this vnld monkey? He seems to have wonderful 
powers, for he is more than a match for a hundred 
thousand heavenlj' hosts, and the heavenly Prince Li 
begs for more help; let the celestial soldiers help him. " 
Before he finished speaking, Kwanj'in with folded palms 
begged him to wait. "Let me, a poor priestess, recom- 
mend to you a god that is able to capture this monkej'." 
The Emperor said, "Who is this god that you recom- 
mend ? ' ' K wanyin said , * * Your worth j' sacred Kinsman , 
the divine Prince who is at the Kwanchow(baptism)river. 
Formerly he drove away six legions. He has younger 
brothers also on the Plum mountain, with one thousand 
two hundred spirits, and their magic powers are very great. 
But they only obey the command of the Celestial Emperor. 
Will you therefore issue an edict commanding them to 
go and help? In this way you will succeed in capturing 
the monkeys." 

When the Celestial Emperor heard this, he ordered 



THE GREAT HOLT ONE CAPTURED 81 

an edict for this end and sent one of the chiefs 
forth to carry it out. When this chief came to the 
mouth of the Kwanchow river he did not tarry a 
moment, but went straight to the divine Kinsman. The 
doorkeepers at once announced his arrival. The Prince 
and all his younger brethren came to receive him, burnt 
incense and opened the edict. It said, " In the 
Mountain Garden there is a monkey demon called the 
Great Holy One the Equal of Heaven, M'ho has created 
a great disturbance. He has thrown the great Peach 
Banquet into disorder. Although a hundred thousand 
heavenly hosts have been sent down to the Mountain 
Garden, they have not been able to put him down. 
Therefore I call upon my worthy relative and all his 
faithful followers to go to the Mountain Garden and 
help in stamping out the rebellion. After the work is 
done he will be highly promoted and greatly 
rewarded. " The divine Kinsman replied, " I shall 
with pleasure go at once to help." 

We need not enlarge on what the chief said, but 
relate that the divine Kinsman called his six brethren 
of the Plum mountain, namely, the four governors, 
Kang, Chang, Yao and Li, and the two commanders-in- 
chief, Kuo Shin and Chih Kien to go with him. The 
brethren joyfully went together and called the roll of 
their hosts, with their hunting hawks and hounds, and 
their bows and arrows. They went before the wild 
winds and in no time crossed the Eastern Ocean and 
arrived at the Mountain Garden. But it was so thickly 
surrounded by rows upon rows of soldiers, that they 
could not get near. The Eoyal Kinsman cried out, "I 



82 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

am the Royal Kinsman commanded by the Celestial 
Emperor to come and take the monkej'-demons. Quickly 
open the gate." At once the gate keeper announced his 
arrival, and the four great heavenly angels and 
Prince Li came out to meet him. Having been asked 
how the war was getting on, the heavenly Prince told 
the whole story. Then the Divine Kinsman laughed 
and said, "Now that I have come here, I will make a 
change. You, sirs, do not scatter j'ourselves on the 
mountain, but keep close by, and wait until I fight the 
Great Holy One. Please let Prince Li To-ta have a 
telescope through which to watch the monkey, for I 
am afraid that when he is defeated, he will try to 
escape to some other place. "We must all keep a sharp 
look-out lest he should getaway." 

The Heavenly Prince ordered things to be carried 
out as directed. The divine Kinsman led the four 
governors and the two commanders-in-chief, including 
himself seven in all, out to the camp to fight, and the 
generals carefully watched round the camp, and had all 
their hunting beasts ready. Then all the grass-headed 
hosts (lower ranks of soldiers) received their orders. The 
divine Kinsman went straight to the waterfall outside the 
cave, and saw the hosts of monkeys encamped around in 
perfect order. In the centre of the cami^ there was a flag- 
staff with a flag on which was written, ' The Great Holy 
One, the Equal of Heaven. ' The divine Kinsman said, 
' ' How is it that this demon dares to call himself the 
Equal of Heaven? " When the little monkeys saw the 
divine Kinsman, they ran in and announced his arrival. 
The monkey King seized his steel club and, putting on 



THE GREAT HOLY ONE CAPTURED 83 

his armour, jumped outside the camp gate, and looked 
at the divine Kinsman. He was really beautiful and was 
dressed superbly. When the Great Holy One saw him, 
he smiled inwardly and lifted his steel club and shouted 
out, ' ' What small general are you who dares to come 
and fight with me?" 

The divine Kinsman shouted back, "You foolish 
fellow, you seem to have eyes, but cannot see. Do 5'ou not 
know me? I am the Kinsman of the Celestial Emperor, 
come here by order of the Throne to take you, and you, 
foolish one, defy us and do not know what is good for 
you. " The Great Holy One said, " Now I remember the 
Celestial Emperor's sister bad an idea of coming down to 
earth to marry Mr. Yang. They had a son who used to 
go to the. peach mountain with a hatchet in his hand, 
can you be this one? Well, sir, I will not fight you. Go 
back quickly and tell your four great angels of Heaven 
to come forth." The divine Kinsman, hearing this, was 
very angrj'', and said, "You wretched monkey, do not be 
so foolish. Take a cut from my sword." The Great 
Holy One raised his steel club and the two fought with all 
their might. They fought three hundred bouts, and it 
is difficult to say which had the better of it. Then the 
divine Kinsman roused himself terribly, shook himself 
and cried out, " Change !" and he was so changed that 
he was a hundred thousand feet high and he held in his 
hand a trident with sharpest points, each as strong as 
the peak of a mountain. His face and teeth were black, 
and his hair vermillion red. Looking at the Great Holy 
One, he aimed a blow at his head. The Great Holy One 
also used his magic art and changed himself so that he 



84 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

looked exactly like the divine Kinsman. He raised his 
magic club which was as huge as a peak of the Himalay- 
as, and opposed the divine Kinsman and so terrified the 
standard bearer that he could not hold the flag, and the 
two generals Peng and Pa that they could not hold their 
swords. 

The four governors Kang, Chang, Yao and Li to- 
gether with the two commanders-in-chief Kuo Shin and 
Chih Kien gave orders to disperse the grass-headed hosts, 
and go to the waterfall outside the cave, and carry with 
them the falcons and hounds and the bows and arrows 
to kill everybody outrijght. Alas ! the poor monkeys were 
throwing away their spears and armour, their swords and 
lances, and were running and screaming, some fleeing to 
the mountains, others to the caves. The Great Holy One, 
suddenly seeing all the monkej's of his camp fleeing in 
terror, was himself alarmed, and, thinking of hiding 
himself by magic, retreated with his club. The divine 
Kinsman followed and said, "Where are you going? 
Submit yourself at once and we will forgive you ! " The 
Great Holy One had no desire to f^ht, so he fled away, but 
when he came near the mouth of the cave, he met the 
four governors Kang, Chang, Yao and Li and the two 
commanders-in-chief, who stopped his way and said, 
" Where are you going, you wretched monkey?" The 
Great Holy One, trembling hand and foot, took his club 
and made it as small as a needle and hid it in his ear, 
shook his body and was transformed into a magpie and 
flew to a branch on the top of a tree. 

The six brothers were confounded, and searched for 
him in all directions but could not find him. So they 



THE GREAT HOLY ONE CAPTURED 85 

called out together, "This monkey, see, we have lost 
hiinl" "Whilst they were talking of this, the divine 
Kinsman arrived and asked, "How did you lose him?" 
They replied, " Here, where we had surrounded him, he 
suddenly disappeared!" The divine Kinsman looked 
around with hia phoenix eyes and saw the Monkey King 
in the form of a magpie on the top of a tree. He threw 
aside his spear and bow and used his naagic to change 
himself into a starving falcon, and flew towards the 
magpie. The Great Holy One, seeing this, flew away and 
changed himself into an eagle and made for the sky. 
The divine Kinsman, then, quickly fluttered his feathers 
and changed himself into an ocean roc, and flew up to 
to the cloud to pounce upon him. The Great Holy One, 
seeing this, transformed himself into a fish in a stream 
and disappeared. The divine Kinsman followed him to 
the brook side but could see no trace of him. In his 
heart he thought, " This monkey must have gone into 
the water ! I must transform myself into a shell- fish, and 
after a change or two more, I shall surely get him ! " So 
he changed again into a bird that catches fish and so float- 
ed down on the waves of the water and rested awhile . The 
Great Holy One, having changed himself into a fish, was 
also carried down by the stream. Then he suddenly saw 
something flying like a bird, somewhat like a mandarin 
duck or a heron, but without red legs, and divined that 
the Kinsman had changed himself into a bird and was 
waiting for him. He then turned round and made a sudr 
den whirl in the water and disappeared . The divine Kins- 
man, seeing this whirling fish, first like a carp but with- 
out a red tail, then like a perch but without scales, then 



86 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

like a black fish but without a star on its head, then 
like a bream but without a needle on its head, thought, 
' ' How is it that at the sight of me this fish disappears? It 
must be that it is no other than the Monkey changed into 
a fish ! " So with his beak he tried to snatch the fish. The 
Gi'eat Holy One then escaped out of the water and chang- 
ing himself into a water snake on the edge of the river, 
rustled into the grass where he hid himself. Then 
the divine Kinsman, hearing some noise in the water, 
and seeing a water snake coming out, recognised it as the 
Holy One, and changed himself into a grey heron. With 
his long pincers-like beak he tried to pounce on the snake 
and swallow it. The M'ater snake wriggled out and 
changed itself into a fetid tree, on the top of an acrid 
sand}' beach. 

After some more changes the divine Kinsman shot 
at him when he was like a cuckoo. The Great Holy One 
took advantage of that and rolled down to the bottom of 
the hill like a dead thing, and then changed himself 
into a local temple, transforming the various parts of his 
body into the parts of the temple. There was a difficulty 
about the tail, but he finally turned it into a flag-staff. 
The divine Kinsman, looking about for the shot cuckoo., 
saw a tiny shrine with a flag-staff behind, and smiled 
and thought, ' And so the Monkey has changed into 
this now. I have seen many temples and shrines, but I 
have never seen a flag-staff put up behind one before ! 
He thinks he can deceive me and get me to enter, and 
then he will swallow rae with one gulp. But I am not 
going to be tempted into entering it. I will first break 
through the door and windows with my fists.' The 




The Ancilnt ok Days. — Trit, Foundku hf Taoism. 



THE GREAT HOLY ONE CAPITJRED 87 

Great Holy One, on feeling this pounding said, "What 
smart eyes he has ! If he destroys the door and windows, 
he will destroy my eyes and teeth and I shall be hope- 
lessly wounded." So he jumped like a tiger and suddenly 
disappeared in the air. 

The divine Kinsman looked for him all round, but 
only saw the four governors and the two commanders-in- 
chief rushing towards him and eagerly saying, ' ' Have you 
caught the Great Holy One?" The divine Kinsman 
laughed and said, " The Monkey had just changed himself 
into a temple and thought he would tempt me to go in, but 
when I was about to break through his door and windows, 
he got away and disappeared altogether, leaving no trace 
behind him . Most mysterious ! , most mysterious ! ' ' They 
were all alarmed and looked round in all directions and 
still they found no trace of him. The Royal Kinsman 
then said, " Stay here, brethren, and watch, and I will go 
up to the sky and look for him." When he got there, 
he saw Prince Li with Na-to on the clouds, high up in the 
air, scanning all round with his telescope. The divine 
Kinsman called out to Prince Li and asked, "Have you 
seen the Monkey King?" " No, I have not, we are here 
looking for him. ' ' The divine Kinsman then told the story 
of all the magic changes of the Monkey, until he changed 
himself into a temple and then disappeared completely. 

When Prince Li heard this, he took up his telescope 
again and looked all round, and then he smiled and said, 
" Go at once, go at once, the Monkey has used the magic 
of making himself invisible. After leaving the camp, he 
went to your K wanchow river.' ' When the divine Kins- 
man heard that, he also spirited himself away to the mouth 



88 mSSION TO HEAVEN 

of the river. But after the Great Holy One had got 
there, he changed himself into the form of the divine 
Kinsman himself, came down from the clouds and enter- 
ed a temple. As no one could distinguish the fraud, all 
eame and kow-towed, and he in their midst surveyed the 
burning of incense, and then read the written prayers and 
heard Li Hu paying his vows of three animals for sacrifice, 
Chang Lung offering thanksgiving for blessings received, 
Chao Kia begging for a son, and Chien Ping begging to be 
relieved of his duties on account of ill-health. As this 
performance was going on, there came a man to announce 
that an old man had come. All quickly turned 
round to see and were greatly frightened at his demeanour. 
The divine Kinsman, for he was the old man, said, 
" Has not the Great Holy One the Equal of Heaven come 
here? " They replied, " No, we have not seen the Great 
Holy One, but there is an old man inside burning 
incense." The divine Kinsman rushed inside. The 
Great Holy One at sight of him appeared in his true 
form and said, " Do not make any disturbance, Prince, 
the temple belongs to the Sun family." The Prince 
raised his trident, with its double edged blades, rushed 
on him to cut him down, but the Monkey King 
evaded the Prince's thrust, took out his embroidery 
needle from his ear and when it grew as large in circum- 
ference as an arm or leg, rushed to meet him and there 
was a fierce struggle between them. They got out of the 
temple and fought in the air as they went, until they 
reached the Mountain Garden, where they terrified the 
four great angels of Heaven and their followers, who were 
surrounding the place. The four governors and two com- 



THE GREAT HOLY ONE CAPTURED 89 

manders-in-chief came to meet the divine Kinsman and 
with all their might tried to surround the Great Holy 
One. Then the Chief, having called the six brethren and 
their soldiers together to take the Monkey King, returned 
to Heaven to report. 

The Celestial Emperor, Kwanyin, and the Queen of 
Heaven, together with all the Taoist Shen officers were 
gathered in the Ling Shao Hall talking and saying, 
' ' Since the second Prince has gone to the battle, 
we have not heard any tidings to-day." Kwanyin folded 
her palms and said, "Your humble priestess begs you 
and Buddha to go outside the South gate of Heaven, and 
see for yourselves how the war goes on." The King re- 
plied " That is a good suggestion, let us go outside the 
South gate." 

So the gate was opened and they looked far and 
wide, but only saw the Heavenly hosts thick all over the 
place defending the four gates. Prince Li and Na-to were 
looking through their glasses in mid-air, and Lhe divine 
Kinsman had surrounded the Great Holy One, and was 
fighting fiercely. Kwanyin said -to the Ancient of Days, 
"The second Prince whom I recommended has great magic 
power and has surrounded the Great Holy One, but has 
not yet laid hold of him. May I go and help? We shall 
soon have him seized. ' ' The Ancient of Days said , " Ho w 
can you help him?" Kwanyin replied, " I will take my 
bottle of clear water and willow branch and throw them on 
the head of the monkey. He will not be killed, but he 
will fall. Then let the divine Kinsman seize him." 
The Ancient of Days said, " This bottle is porcelam, 
and if you hit him, all well: but if you do not hit his 



90 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

head but simply hit his steel club, then your bottle will 
be broken. "Wait a moment, do not move, let me have 
a try." Kwanyin said, "And what weapon do you 
use?" He repUed, "I have one, I have one." 

Then from his left arm he drew forth a ring and said, 
" This is my weapon, which was forged by me when 
preparing the Pill of Immortality. It is full of spiritual 
efficacy and transforming power. Neither fire can burn 
it, nor water destroy it. It can be changed into a noose 
to capture all things and is called the Diamond coil. An- 
other name is the Diamond case, and it was formerly used 
to civilize the Huns into Buddhas. It has very great 
merit. In the end it is sure to give protection. Wait 
until I throw this down." Having said that, he dropped 
it from the gate of heaven, and it rolled down over the top 
of the camp of the Mountain Grarden, and straight on 
the head of the king of the monkeys. He was busy 
fighting the seven heroes, and did not know that a new 
weapon with wonderful effect had fallen from heaven. 
He could not stand steady on his legs, and fell. He 
turned on his side and was about to get up again, when 
the hounds fell upon him, and the heroes bound him with 
ropes, and hooked swords which prevented him from 
transforming himself any more. He cursed and said, 
"You death hounds, why do you not go and look after 
your own homes? Why do you come to bite Old Sun?" 

Then the Ancient of Days withdrew the diamond 
coil and invited the Celestial Emperor, Kwanyin, the 
Queen of Heaven and all the rest to return to the Ling 
Shao Hall. The four great angels of heaven with Prince 
Li and all the gods called their hosts together and went 



THE GREAT HOLY ONE CAPTURED 91 

up to the divine Kinsman and congratulated him, say- 
ing, " It is all your wonderful prowess." But he said, 
" No, this is owing to the great blessing of the Ancient 
of Daj's and his heavenly hosts. The merit does not be- 
long to me." The four governors Kang, Chang, Yao 
and Li said, "Take this slave to the Celestial Emperor." 
The divine Kinsman said, ' ' As some of you have not been 
registered in Heaven, you cannot see the Celestial Em- 
peror. Let the six first ranks of the heavenly spirits, to- 
gether with the Prince of Heaven, ascend to heaven and 
report. Let the generals of the army remain here to 
search the mountain. When you have searched it all 
then return to the Kwanchow river and wait until I get 
you a reward so that we may rejoice together." 

So the governors and the two commanders-in-chief 
remained behind and the divine Kinsman with his com- 
pany mounted the cloud and sang a song of victory, as 
they wended their way to heaven. Soon they arrived at 
the Tung Ming Hall. The heavenly generals said, 
"The four great heavenly Princes and their followers 
have now caught the Monkey-demon, and have arrived 
here to await your commands." The Celestial Emperor 
then ordered that the Chief and all the heavenly hosts 
should be quartered in the new demon terrace, and that 
the captive should be flayed alive. 

If you wish to know what became of his life after- 
wards, j'ou must listen to the next chapter. 



CHAPTER VII. 

IMPRISONED FOR 500 YEARS 

The Great Holy One jumps out of the eight 
diagrram crucible. 

Is imprisoned under Nature's mountain. 

When the Great Holy One was escorted by the 
Heavenly host to the new demon-terrace, he was slung to 
a beam, but neither knife nor hatchet nor sword had 
touched his body. The Southern Star with all the stars 
of heaven burnt as usual, but none could burn him, and 
the gods of thunder rolled forth their thunder, but did 
not injure him in the least. 

The Chief then said, " We do not know what kind 
of armour this Great Holy One has, for nothing can hurt 
him. We have tried swords to cut him and hatchets to 
flay him, thunder to terrify him and lightning to burn 
him, but all is of no avail. W^hat shall we do?" The 
Celestial Emperor, having heard this, asked, " What 
shall we do to this demon?" The Ancient of Days said, 
" The Monkey has eaten of the immortal peaches and 
drunk the immortal wine, and taken the Immortal Pills 
and swallowed them all. Though tried hy heavenly fire, 
he is become a piece of diamond which you cannot smelt. 
He cannot be harmed. Let him go with me, and I will 
put him in the eight diagram crucible, and let all the fire 
of civil and military arts burn him, so that I may get 
at the true Immortal Pill, and his body return to ashes." 

The Celestial Ruler of heaven, hearing this, said, 
" Let the six guards take him away, and give him to the 




Sun escapes fkom the CRuciiii-E. 



IMPRISONED FOR 500 YEARS 93 

Ancient of Days." Then he called for the divine Kins- 
man and ordered him to be presented with a hundred 
gold flowers, one hundred jars of heavenly wine, strange 
and precious pearls with silks and embroideries, to be 
divided with his brethren. The divine Kinsman, having 
thanked his Majesty's grace, returned to the mouth of the 
river Kwanchow. 

The Ancient of Days went to the Teu Suai mansion, 
unbound the ropes on the Great Holy One, opened the 
hand-cuffs and pushed him inside the eight diagram cru- 
cible, and ordered the servants to kindle the fire so as to 
burn his dross. This crucible consisted of the eight dia- 
grams — ^Kien, Kan, Ken, Chin. Suen, Li,Kun, Tui. Now 
he took his body and put it under the Suen diagram. This 
Suen is wind; and if there is wind, then there is no fire, 
but the wind makes the smoke to arise until both eyes be- 
come red to the great injury of the sight. Hence it is 
called the golden essence of the fiery eyes, truly a fleeting 
reflected light. In forty-nine days the conversion was 
complete. 

On the day the crucible was opened to get the pure 
metal, the Great Holy One took both his hands and hid his 
eyes which were weak and full of tears. Hearing some 
noise above the crucible, he opened his eyes and saw a 
light which he could not endure. So he bent himself 
and jumped out of the crucible, upsetting it with great 
noise, and went forth and terrified those tending the fire, 
who came to lay hold of him. He took them one by 
one and threw them on the ground. He was like a mad 
white-faced tiger or a one-homed dragon. The Ancient 
of Days came up and laid hold of him, but the Great Holy 



94 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

One flung him also on the ground, and escaped, cariying 
his magic needle in his ear, where it was being shaken by 
the wind. "When it grew larger he took it in his hand, 
and rushed madly on everj'one he met, beating the 
ministers of the nine bright stars so that everj^body shut 
the doors and disappeared out of sight. He was truly a 
wonderful Monkey, as the poet sa3's: — 

1. In chaos time the soul immortal is, 

Througli thousand changes, changeless nature is, 

In darkness, dark unmoved the first cause lies 

Unmoved the Model called the First Mystery, 

The lead and silver furnace is not life. 

But life eternal lies outside matter, 

Ever changing and transforming. 

Of three creeds and five laws we need not speak, 

2. A spark of light Divine shines in vast space, 
Lasts long or short as man wills to spend it, 
Peaceful or warlike as he pleases. 

3. The Monkey heart is like the heart of man, 
This monkey tale is deepest allegory ; 

Man is Great Holy One and Heaven's Equal 

Official rank as studmaster has man, 

The horse and monkey, heart and mind, 

Within the man subdued must be. 

To find true life there is but one true law 

The man and Model must be a true pair. 
At this time the Monkey King, having no regard for 
high or low, whirled his steel club in all directions, so 
that no one dared to approach him , and made straight for 
the Tung Ming Hall, outside the Ling Shao Hall. For- 
tunately, on the right there was the holy Shen, and on the 
left the officials of the Ling Chin Hall. Seeing the Great 
Holy One coming and brandishing his steel club, Shen 
wanted to stop him and said, " You impudent Monkey, 
where do you want to go? I am here, do not behave like 



IMPRISONED FOR 500 YEARS 95 

a fool." The Great Holy One did not trouble to answer 
him, but raised his spear to strike him. The spiritual 
official quickly met his attack, and the two fought fierce- 
ly in front of the Ling Shao Hall. Before it was clear 
which was victorious, the holy Shen on the right sent 
his assistant general to the Thunder Palace and request- 
ed thirtj'-six thunder generals to come and help. 

They came together and surrounded the Great Holy 
one on the terrace. They all looked most warlike, but 
although they came very near him with their knives and 
spears and swords and lances, the Great Holy One had no 
fear and merely shook his body. By magic he changed 
himself into a being with three heads and six arms, and 
the steel club by a twist became three, and the six arms, 
wielding three clubs, twirled about like a spinning wheel 
on the terrace. 

The thunder generals could not come near him, as 
the poet says: — 

Perfect life, shining bright 

Down all ages witliout fail, 

How can man understand it? 

Fire cannot quench nor water drown it, 

Like a Mani jewel, swords and spears cannot hurt it. 

It can be good or ill as chance commands. 

Doing good transforms one to a god. 

Doing evil makes a horned and hairy demon, 

Ever defying heaven, unarrested in his course 

By gods of thunder and all the hosts of heaven. 

Then all the generals closed up around him but 
could not get near his person. They fought terribly 
with such a noise tliat the Celestial Empe'tor heard it 
and sent two officials to go to the West, and invite 
Buddha to come down. 



96 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

As soon as these two officials received this com- 
mand, they went to a grand service in the Spiritual 
Momjtain in the West where Buddha's beautiful temple 
was. There they paid their respects to the four Cherubim 
and the eight Pusas and begged them to announce them. 
These led the officials to the Precious Lotus Terrace, 
saying, "Julai invites you two officials to see him. 
Go three times round in procession and wait. Julai asks 
what the Celestial Emperor wishes by sending you here." 
The two officials told the story of the Great Holy One 
from beginning to end and added, "The matter at 
present is very urgent and the Celestial Ruler invites 
Buddha to come to the rescue." Julai, on hearing this, 
spoke to all the Buddhas and said, "All of you sit herein 
this temple hall, while I go and tame the devil and ease 
the Emperor's mind." Then he called upon the two 
chief disciples, Ananda and Kasyapa, to go with him. 

They left the service and went to the Ling Shao 
Hall where the Celestial Emperor resided, and heard a 
terrible noise of battle, with the thirty-six thunder 
generals surrounding the Monkey. Buddha gave order, 
"Let the thunder generals stop their fight and open the 
cordon to let the Great Holj' One come out, so that I may 
speak to him ." The generals obeyed and the Great Holy 
One assumed his natural form and with a loud shout 
of anger cursed and said, "Who are you, and where do 
you come from?" Julai smiled and said. "I am 
Shakyamuni, from the happiest Paradise in the West. 
Praise be to Amitabha. [Note the distinction between 
Shakyamuni and Amitabha. — Tr.] I hear you are wild 
and mad, frequently troubling the Palace of Heaven. 



IMPRISONED FOR 500 YEARS 97 

I do not know where 3'ou have been brought up, nor 
when you thought of religion, nor why you are so 
fierce. ' ' The Great Holy One said, 

" Born I am a natural geni, 
As monkey lived in mountain grove, 
My house a cave behind a waterfall, 
Asking all how best to find tlie life eternal, 
I practised many arts to be immortal, 
I learnt all magic without limit. 
And liating the one span of human life, 
I fixed my heart on joining gods divine. 
The halls of heaven were not full at first, 
From age to age the saints of earth ascend. 
If they succeeded, why not also I? 
A hero he who wins the race." 

When Buddha heard these words, he laughed and 
said, ' 'Ah, ah, you are that monkey slave, seeking liberty. 
How dare you have no conscience and usurp the throne of 
Heaven? Heaven's Ruler has continued with great self- 
sacrifice from etefMtj', and throughout a thousand five 
hundred and fifty kalpas, each kalpa a hundred and 
twenty-nine thousand six hundred years. And how many 
years do you think that is? It was in this way that He 
was able to gain that position of infinite power, while 
you are still only an animal. You are not a man j-et. 
I will cut down your age. You must speedily repent 
and not saj' a word of complaint, otherwise you might 
meet with an enemy that will at once rob j'ou of your 
life, and to end your career would be a great pity. ' ' The 
Great Holy One replied, "Although the Supreme Ruler 
has made great sacrifices for many kalpas, he should not 
live there for ever. Leaders should rule in turn, next 
year should be iny turn and he should give way and 



98 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

give me the palace of heaven. If not, I will certainly 
make trouble again and there cannot be peace." 
Buddha replied, " Since j'ou have been deprived of the 
magic of life eternal, how can you by victory get the 
Celestial Palace?" The Great Holy One said, "I know 
seventy-two magic af^TTcah' outlive all kalpas. I can 
"ride'on fiie"clouds~and with one leap can cover eighteen 
thousand li. How can I not sit on the throne of 
Heaven?" Buddha said to him, '"'Let me try your skill. 
Since you have a skill in making great leaps, stand on 
the palm of my right hand and let me see if you can 
jump out of it. Then I %nll acknowledge that you 
have won, and there will be no further need of weapons 
to fight, and the Celestial Emperor will go away and yield 
the Celestial Palace to you. If you cannot jump out of the 
palm of my hand, you will have to go down below and 
become a demon again, and practice religion for a 
thousand kalpas more before you como-aud make further 
disturbance." 

The Great Holj' One secretly rejoiced and said to 
himself, "This Julai must be a perfect fool. I, Old Sun, 
can jump eighteen thousand li at once, and his palm is 
not one foot. How can I not jump out of it?" Then 
he spoke aloud, "Since you propose this, I agree to it" 
Buddha said, "Agreed, agreed!" and opened his hand, 
and the palm was only about the size of a small lotus 
leaf. The Great Holy* One took his magic steel and 
made a leap and rested on Buddha's palm, and said, 
"I am going." He thought he was travelling invisibly 
on the clouds, and that Buddha was watching him 
going fast like a windmill without a stop. The Great 



IMPRISONED FOR 500 YEARS 99 

Holj' One, tliinking he was rushing on the clouds, 
suddenly saw five pillars of red flesh in front stopping him , 
beyond which was darkness. He then said, "This must 
be the end of the journey, I will go back now, and Julai is 
my witness that the Ling Shao Hall of the Celestial 
Emperor is mine now ! ' ' He was about to call out to 
show he had stopped, when he thought he would mark 
where he had arrived and show it as a pi-oof to Julai. 
He therefore plucked a hair, chewed it, blew it out and 
cried out, "Change!" and it was changed into a pencil 
covered with ink. On the middle pillar he wrote, "The 
Great Holy One, the Equal of Heaven, has travelled thus 
far! " and then put back his hair in the original place. 
Then at the bottom of the first pillar, he left some 
stinking matter, after which he though the had jumped 
up to the clouds and returned. He found himself still 
standing on the palm of Julai' s hand and said, "I have 
been away and have come back! Now call upon the 
Celestial Emperor to j'ield his throne to me." Julai said, 
" Impertinent moukej', you have never left my palm!" 

The Great Holy One replied. "Do you not know that 
I went to the very end of Heaven, and saw five pillars 
of red flesh in front of me, bej'ond which was darkness, 
and I left some stinking marks there in proof of my 
arrival there? Will j'ou dare to go and look at it with 
me ? " Julai said , " There is no need to go ! Bend down 
your head and look. "The Great Holy One opened his 
big eyes and looked and Buddha showed him what he 
had written. ' ' ' ' The Great Sage,jthe Equal of "Heaven " 
has travailed thus far." At the root of the first finger 
there was a stinking monkey mark. The Great Holy One 



100 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

was greatly afraid at this. "Yes, trulj' there was such 
a thing as this. I wrote these charactei-s on these 
pillars. But how are these on your fingers? Can it be 
that there is a magic by which one can foretell things? 
I do not believe it. Wait until I go there once more 
and see!" 

The Great Hoi}- One quickly exerted his body to jump 
out of the palm as before, but Buddha turned his hand 
upside down, and the Monkey king was thrown outside 
the West Gate of Heaven. The five pillars became a 
mountain joined together, and were called the Five 
Elements mountain, and Buddha gently covered him up 
under the mountain. Then all the thunder gods, to- 
gether with Ananda and Kasj-apa, one by one, put 
their palms together and cried out, "Wonderful, 
wonderful!" 

Once we vowed to sacrifice self, 
In the thousand sorrows of life how few succeed ! 
But a change comes sudden to all resolved. 
When the next change comes, who can tell? 

AVhen the Buddha Julai had subjugated the 
Monkey Demon, he called Ananda and Kasyapa to 
return with him to the West. Then the immortal 
heavenly leaders came out of the Ling Shao Hall and 
begged Julai to wait a little, till the Celestial Emperor 
arrived. When Buddha heard this, he turned his head 
and looked up, and there were eight brilliant carriages 
and nine coloured umbrellas, full of choristers singing, 
praising the Infinite Spirit, and scattering precious 
fragrant flowers. They came in front of Buddha and 
said, "Thanks to thy great mercy, the Monkey Demon 
has been subjugated. Will not Julai stay a day longer 



IMPRISONED FOR 500 YEARS 101 

with us so that we may invite all the gods to a thanks- 
giving banquet?" Julai put his palms together and 
thanked them and said, "I came here in obedience to 
the Celestial Emperor. Whatever power has been shown 
has been owing to the great blessing of the Heavenly 
Ruler and all the gods. Please thank him for his kind 
thought." 

Then the Celestial Emperor ordered the Board of 
Thunder and all the gods to arrange themselves, and the 
Three Pure Ones and the Cherubim and the Five Elders, 
the six Officials and seven Originals, the eight Points, the 
nine Stars and the ten Boards, in all ten thousand H0I3' 
Ones; and all thank Buddha for his favours. He also 
ordered the four Celestial Generals and the fairies of the 
nine Heavens to open the Pearl Palace and the Precious 
Palace of the Great Mystery and the private rooms 
and invite Julai to sit on the top of the seven 
storied throne, and that seats be arranged for each guest 
and dishes with dragons' liver, phcenix' marrow, wine 
and peaches be provided. In a short time appeared the 
Taoist divinities: — 

Yu Ch'ing, the senior of the Heavenly Host, 

Shang Ch'ing. the most potent, 

TaL Ch'ing, the most virtuous, 

The five Saintly Spirits, 
/ The Ministers of the Five Great St.«irs, 

The Three Officers, 

The Four Holy Ones, 

The Ministers of the Nine Lights of Heaven, 

The Heavenly Prince of Dark Space, Li, 

His Assistant Na-to, 

All the Powerful Spirits, seated in pairs, 

With canopies above them, 

Holding lustrous pearls most precious, 

Witli fruits immortal and rarest flowers. 



102 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

They lifted their dishes and said, "Thanks to 
Juki's infinite power, the Demon Monkej' has been 
captured, and now since the Celestial Emperor has invited 
us to this thanksgiving banquet, we would like to know 
what name Juki gives to this banquet." Juki replied^ 
"A banquet for the Peace of Heaven." All the gods 
and Shen said, "Good, truty it is a great Peace ! " Then 
each sat down in his seat, scattered flowers and made 
music. It was a joyous occasion, and all were glad. 
Then they saw the Queen of Heaven, and several 
companies of lovely fairies who danced before Buddha. 
They said, "Formerly the Demon Monkey disturbed the 
Queen of Heaven's peach banquet. To-day, Juki bj- his 
great power has locked up the monke}\ We rejoice in 
this banquet for the Peace of Heaven. We have 
nothing to present, we only bring a few peaches in clean 
hands as offerings. ' ' Buddha put the palms of his hands 
together and said to the Queen, "Besides this, j'ou have 
also arranged for some to sing and some to dance in 
mazes." 

Not long after, agreat fragrance filled the place, and 
the Spirit of the star of the Southern Cross arrived. After 
paying his respects, he was told, to go and see Juki, to 
whom he said, "When we first heard that the Monkey 
Demon had been taken by the Ancient of Days to the 
Teu Suai mansion and had his dross burnt there, we 
thought all trouble was at an end and little expected it 
would break forth again. Happily Juki has come and 
seized this monster, and to celebrate the conquest this 
banquet has been arranged. Therefore we have come, 
but we have nothing to offer but some purple fungus of 



IMPRISONED FOK 500 YEARS 103 

immortalitj', some jade graps and Immortal Pills." 

The poet says: — 

Julai'a years are countless as the Ganges' sand, 
His golden body twice eight feet in height, 
On nine lotus tiers he sits enthroned. 
Invisible Lord of the seen and unseen world, 
The chief of the gods of matter and spirit. 

Jvilai received him graciously. The angel of the star 
of longevity (Mercurj-) sat down, and then the bare- footed 
great Shen arrived and paid his respects to the Celestial 
Emperor. He went to Buddha and thanked him, 
saying, "I thank you profoundly for your great power 
in putting down that monkey monster, but I have 
nothing to offer you but two pears, and a few baked 
dates." Julai thanked him, and called Ananda and 
Kasj^apa to collect together all the offerings, after which 
he went up to the Celestial Emperor and thanked him 
for the Banquet. 

After this the police superintendent reported that 
the Great Holy One had put out his head from under 
the mountain. .Julai said, "That is no matter." 
Then he pulled out from his sleeve a piece of paper on 
which was written a few golden characters, viz, O^M 
]\IANI PADME HUM, which he gave to Ananda, and 
told him to place it on the top of the mountain. Ananda 
then went out through the gate of Heaven and, reaching 
the top of the Five-Element ]\Iountain, made the paper 
fast on a square rock. That mountain had a hole with 
a hinge which moved with beats of breathing. This he 
took away without moving the body. Then Ananda 
returned and reported what he had done. 



104 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Julai then took leave of the Celestial Emperor and 
all the gods. As he, with his two disciples, passed 
through the gate of heaven, they pronounced a blessing. 
Kwanyin called one of the local gods and some Turkish 
soldiers of the surrounding regions to guard the 
mountain. "When the Monkey is hungry, give him 
an iron pill ; when he is thirsty, give him some copper 
syrup, and when the daj's of his_^pmiishment are 
ended, there will come some one to (deliver \him." How 
many 5'^ears hence it was, listen^ to' the following 
chapter and you shall know. 




Buddha Provides Sacred Sckiptuhes foe thu 
Salvation of Men. 



CHAPTER VIII. 
BUDDHA PROVIDES SCRIPTURES 

Buddha prepares Sacred Scriptures as a guide 
to Perfect Joy. 

Kwanyin is appointed by Heaven to go to 
Chang-an (Sianfu). 

[outline] 

I ask what is the use of prayer 
And numberless petitions? 
Are they not all in vain, 
Grinding a brick to make a mirror, 
Heaping up snow for corn. 
Wasting years of precious time. 
Swallowing an ocean of fur for meat, 
Storing a mountain of straw? 
The glorious God smiles on you ! 
When you awake, you are beyond 
The ten stages, the three religions. 

■Julai went to his Thunder Mansion, where he was 
welcomed by 3,000 Buddhas, 500 Arhats, 8 great Che- 
rubim and numberless saints (Pusas). 

Deep and great is Wisdom, reaching Heaven, earth and hell. 

It is the still and quiet fountain of life. 

Without form, but containing all things. 

Ordering the conquest of the monkey nature. 

It is the beginning of higher life. 

After a sermon, Julai said, looking on the four 
continents of the world, " I find men both good and bad. 
Those in the Eastern continent worshiji Heaven and 
Earth, and are intelligent and peaceful. Those in the 



106 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Northei-n continent live on flesh, and are without intel- 
ligence. Those in the Western continent are mild and 
longlived, without avarice. Those in the Southern con- 
tinent are fond of pleasure and fighting. 1 have a Sacred 
Book, which is a guide to Virtue, and which discusses the 
three realms of saints in heaven, of men on earth, and of 
demons and the lost below. It is in 25 Avorks and 15,144 
volumes. I desire, without fear of the great distance, or 
of the great difficulties, to send it to the Eastern continent, 
where men are ignorant. Who will volunteer to go there 
and get a man of faith to come and fetch them ? ' ' Kwan- 
yin volunteered, and was given five precioui? things: — 

(1) A cassock of Gospel Peace, which would save the Scripturo 
Messenger from death and re-incarnation. 

(2) A pastoral staff, which would save him from fatal danger. 
(3-5) A triple hat of spikes, which would pierce the iiead, cause 

the eyes to swell, the head to aclie, and the skull to crack, 
according to the anathema pronounced over the ohstreperous. 

Kwanyin received them gladly, and called her chief 
disciple, Hui An, to go with her as a body guard. He had 
an iron staff weighing 1,000 catties. 

Soon they came to a quicksand desert and water 
of 3,000 li, so light that a feather would sink in it, 
and met a fierce demon, who fought several tens of bouts 
with Hui An, and demanded to know who he was. He 
said, " I am Mu-to, the second son of the Celestial Prince 
To-ta, with my teacher Kwanyin. Who are you?" 
" I was punished by the Celestial Emperor, and banished 
here, where every seventh day I am tormented with swords 
of remorse." Kwanyin said, " Why do you not rei^ent 
and help to fetch the Sacred Books from the West? 
Then you will no more be tormented with remorse. ' ' He 



BUDDHA PEOVIDES SCRIPTURES lOT 

agreed, and Kwanj'in put her hand in blessing on his 
head, and gave him the name Sa ^Y\x Tsing (Seeker 
after Purity) and bade him remain there till the Budd- 
hist Pilgri^n came from the East. 

Soon after, thej-met another demon and fought, and 
asked him who he was. He said, " I was a general in 
the Milky Way, but, having misbehaved with some fairies 
when drunk, I was sentenced to be born among men. 
By some mistake I was born of a sow, hence my head is 
that of a Pig. I live in this place called Fu Ling Shan 
without any calling, living on other people. Kwan- 
yin, pardon and save me." Kwanyin said, "Ifyou\\ish 
to be saved, j'ou must not do what will ruin you. Hav- 
ing sinned in heaven and been sent down here, you must 
not sin again. If j'ou have a good purpose in life, God 
will help you to succeed." " I wish to follow the right, 
but having sinned against God, what can I do?" Kwan- 
yin said, " I have been authorized to go to the East in 
search of a Chinese Pilgrim who will go to the West for 
Sacred Books. If you follow him on his journey, and 
learn of him, then your sin will be foi'given for 5'our good 
services." The demon said, "I agree." Thereupon 
Kwanyin put her hand on his head and ordained him 
for this purpose. To him was given the name Chu 
(Pig) because his face was like a pig in appearance, but 
his religious name was Chu Wu Neng, Seeker after 
Strength. He also was to wait for the coming of the 
Buddhist Pilgrim. 

Soon they met another creature, a dragon. Kwanyin 
asked, "Who are you, and what are j'ou doing here?" 
Pie replied, " I have been sent down from Heaven be- 



108 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

cause I let one of the palaces burn, and soon I am to die 
for the crime. I pray you, Kwanyin, to save me!" 
Kwanyin then went to see the Celestial Emperor and said 
she was authorized by Buddha to go to the East in search 
of a Chinese Pilgrim. The Pilgrim would need to have a 
carrier for his baggage. She begged the Pv-uler to modify 
the sentence, and let this dragon become a horse and 
carry the Pilgrim's baggage, and in this way make up for 
his past negligence. Her request was granted, and the 
dragon was instructed to wait in a deep valley till the 
Pilgrim arrived from the East. 

Soon after, they came to the Five Elements moun- 
tain where the Monkey King was imprisoned still, under 
the magic words, OM MANX PADME HUM. Though 
he could not move his body, he could speak. On seeing 
Kwanyin, he said, "O merciful Kwanyin, a day in this 
place is as long as a year, and no one comes to see me. 
I have been here 500 j^ears unable to move. I praj' you 
to save me, and I shall henceforth lead a new life." 
Kwanyin said, "If you are really in earnest and desire 
to be good, God will help you. I am going in search of 
a Chinese Pilgrim who is to fetch the Sacred Scriptures. 
When he arrives, he will deliver you if jj^ou are willing to 
become his disciple. There are two others who have al- 
ready pledged themselves to become his disciples. You 
shall be the third."' 

Soon after this she arrived at Chang-an, the capital 
of the great Chinese Empire in the Tang dynasty. 



CHAPTER IX. 

HUEN CHWA^^G'S PARENTAGE 

Chen K-wrang Jui (The Pilgrim's father) falls 
into a great calamity on going to his post. 

Kiang Liui priest is avenged and his parents 
re-warded. 

[outline. ] 

In A.D. 640 the Chinese Emperor issued an edict 
that he would hold an examination to discover the 
best men for the Government service. A student in 
Haichow, named Chen, told his mother that he would 
like to go to the capital, and try the examination. He 
went, and succeeded in coming out first among all. The 
daughter of one of the leading statesmen was given him 
in marriage, and he was appointed to a post at 
Kiangchow. Proceeding to his post, he took his 
mother along with him. On the waj^ the mother fell 
ill, and seeing a man selling fish, the son bought 
a fine one for her. But looking at it, he saw it 
winking its eyes, and having heard that such fish were 
not proper for eating, as they might be human beings, 
he took pity on it, and put it back in the river, so as to 
save its life. His mother said, " Go on to j^our post and 
I will rest here a few days and come on later." The 
husband and wife soon arrived at the Hung river which 
they had to cross. Here a great calamity befell Chen, 
owing to a wrong he had done in a former existence. 
One of the boatmen, Liu Hung, seeing the beautiful 



110 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

bride, arranged with his comrade to murder the husband, 
and throw his body into the river. He threatened 
to kill the wife if she did not obey liim. She was watched 
and prevented from committing suicide. He collected 
her husband's documents and decided to personate Chen 
in his office. 

At this time the night demons announced to the 
Dragon king that a man had been drowned. He 
ordered his body to be brought before him. At sight of 
it, he recognised the very man wlio had saved his life 
when he had been in tlie form of a fish, and had been 
bought for the mother. So he said, "One good turn 
deserves another! I must save this man, and restore his 
life." 

In the meantime the villain Liu Hung arrived at 
Chen's post,and was joyfully welcomed by all. One 
day when Liu Hung was away, Mrs. Chen became very 
sad thinking of her husband and mother-in-law, and 
suddenly became faint, and gave birth to a son. Kwan- 
yin warned her that her false husband would be sure to 
destroy this son unless she saved him. She wrote his 
story with her own blood, and put him on a plank in the 
river, praying that some good man would save him. 
The plank floated down to the Golden Mounbiin temple, 
where the abbot saved the infant and brought him up till 
he was eighteen years of age, when he was ordained a priest 
with the name of Huen Chwang. After this he found his 
mother, his father's mother and his mother's father, 
who after hearing all about the rascalit}'^ of the boatman, 
memorialized the Throne, and was authorized to take 
60,000 soldiers to surround the false official. 



HUEN CHWANG'S PARENTAGE 111 

Finally the scattered family of Chen were re-united. 
The Dragon king restored the soul into the body of the 
husband, who became first Secretary of State, while 
Hnen Chwang became abbot at Hung Fu Sze in Sianfu. 



CHAPTER X. 

A DRAGON EXECUTED 

A foolish dragon chief breaks Heaven's law. 

Owing to a slip of the Chinese Emperor, which 
nearly cost him his life, his Minister of Justice 
sends, on his behalf, a letter to Tsui Ju, the judge 

in Hades. 

[outline.] 

Two scholars in Chang-an , one a fisherman and the 
other a woodsman, wei-e loud in praises of a certain 
fortune-teller, who always advised the fisherman where 
to cast his net, with the result that his net was full of 
fish. One of the water sjiirits, overhearing their words, 
carried the news to the Dragon chief, crying that all the 
fish in the waters would soon be caught, because of the 
fortune-teller. The Dragon became very angry, and 
visited the fortune-teller, who Avas a member of the 
Astronomical Board, and asked him about the weather. 
The fortune-teller predicted a heavy fall of rain the 
following day. The Dragon king said, "If you are 
right about your promised rain, and it comes exactlj-, I 
will give you fifty taels; but if you are wrong, then I 
will smash your house and sign board, and 3^ou shall 
leave the citj', so that the people shall not be deceived 
any more." 

After the bargain was agreed to, the Dragon king 
went back to the deep. After relating the matter to his 
followers, they said, "It is only you, the Dragon king, 




The Deagon God of Rain. 



A DRAGON EXECUTED US 

who knoM'S when rain shall come. How dare this 
false prophet know?" 

Before these words were finished, thej^ heard that a 
despatch had been brouglat for .the Dragon from the 
Celestial EmperOr, and they saw a yellow-robed being 
bearing an edict, which said, ' I command the Dragon 
king to see that to-morrow there shall be heavy rain all 
over Chang-an.' This was exactly what the fortune- 
teller had predicted. At this loss of face the Dragon 
was much perplexed. One of his assistants pro- 
posed to him, "If you, Dragon king, arrange that 
the rain should not come at the exact time, or in the 
quantity predicted, then you need not give the fortune- 
teller the fif tj' taels. " After acting on this suggestion, 
the Dragon king went to the fortune-teller's shop and 
smashed up everything, saying, "You are deceiving all 
men and must be driven away. You deserve to die." 
The fortune-teller replied, "I have done no wrong, and do 
not fear to die, but I fear you have so sinned as to deserve 
death, for you have broken the law of tlie Celestial 
Emperor both as- to time of rain and quantity of it." 
At this the dragon was terribly alarmed and begged the 
fortune-teller to save him from death. "I cannot .save 
you, but I will tell you how you can be saved. To- 
morrow, three-quarters of an hour after noon, j-ou must 
go to the Minister of Justice and ask him to help you." 

The Dragon king did not sleep a wink that night, 
but wandered as a spirit in the air near the bedroom of 
the Chinese Emperor Tai Chung. The Emperor dreamt 
he had gone for a walk, and met a man begging that his 
life should be spared. The Emperor asked him, "Who 



114 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

are j'ou?" He said, "I am one of the celestials, and 
have broken one of the laws of heaven for which I 
must forfeit my life." The Emperor promised him 
pardon, saying, "I will see that the Minister of Justice 
does not execute you." 

At noon, however, the EmjDeror sent for the Minister 
of Justice to play chess with him, and forgot to tell the 
Minister that he had pardoned the Dragon king. At three- 
quarters of an hour after noon, before the game was 
finished, the Minister put his head on the table and fell 
fast asleep. The Emperor did not disturb him. Shortly 
after, the Minister woke up and went on his knees, 
saying he deserved to die for going to sleep in the 
presence of his Emperor. 

Then there was a great uproar outside, and a man 
came in carrying the Dragon's head dripping with 
blood, and flung it before the Emperor. The Emperor 
ordered him to explain. The man said, "I was at the 
execution ground at three-quarters of an hour afternoon, 
when this head fell from the sky." The Emperor 
asked the Minister of Justice what it meant. He 
replied that, when he had slept for a few minutes, he 
had dreamt that he had been to the execution ground 
and had carried out the Emperor's orders, and had 
beheaded the Dragon king. The Emperor both greatly 
rejoiced and greatly grieved over the matter. He 
rejoiced that he had such a faithful minister to carry 
out his orders, and grieved because he had not saved the 
life of the Dragon as he had promised. 

In the end the Emperor fell very ill, and evil spirits 
gave him no peace, throwing bricks and stones over the 



A DRAGON EXECUTED 115 

walls, and latterly the headless spirit of the Dragon 
king came and laid hold of the Emperor, threatening to 
drag him to judgment before Yen Lo, the judge 
of Hades. In this dilemma, when none of his Ministers 
or Doctors could heal or save him, Kwanyin came with 
her jar of water and sprig of willow and made the 
dragon's head grow on his body again, and the Emperor 
was no more haunted. But the Emperor's illness grew 
worse, and when he was on the verge of death, the 
Minister of Justice sent a letter to a friend of his, in Hades, 
named Tsui, through whose influence the Emperor 
might return and resume his duties on earth again. 



'-' . CHAPTER XI. 

',' - THE EMPEROR IN HADES 

,,:> The Emperor is sent to Hell, but returns to 
:^artli again. 

/ /,: A man presents Hell's judge with melons and 
receives his dead wife back. 

^. [ A hundred years run like a stream, 

^ . , And all our affairs float on top of it. 

Yesterday we were as beautiful as peach blossoms, 

To-day we are snow-flakes floating by. 

Like fighting ants our struggles are but dreams. 

Listen to the bird's call to repentance. 

From of old life can be prolonged. 

Those who seek not self are perfect-ed by Heaven. 

It is said that the spirit of Tai Chung mysterioush- 
passed in front of the Five Phoenix Gate, where a host 
of horsemen invited the Emperor to go out for a hunt- 
ing expedition. Tai Chung was delighted and went 
with them. After having gone a long distance, he saw 
neither men nor horses about him, onlj' a great 
wilderness. In his astonishment he was at a loss to 
find his way, but at a distance, he heard a man calling 
to him, "Emperor of the Great Tang dynasty, come 
this wa}'' ! ' ' 

On hearing this, Tai Chung lifted his head and saw 
a man in a netted coat with a leather belt, and a black silk 
hat, holding in his hand an ivory tablet, such as officials 
carry to court on which to take notes. He knelt on the 
roadside and said, "I pray your Majesty to forgive me 
for being late in coming to meet you." Tai Chung said. 




Takg Tai Chung Empeuou of Cihn-.v. 



THE EISIPEROR IN HADES 117 

^Who are you?" The other answered, "Your humble 
officer when living on earth had a father who was th6 
magistrate of Tsz chow, and in time became the Vice- 
President of the Board of Ceremonies. His surname was 
Tsui and name Ju. He is now the judge of the Feng Tu 
Office in Hades. He saw the affair of the ghost of the 
Dragon of river King and knew that your Majesty would 
arrive here to-day, and has come specially to meet you." 
Tai Chung, greatly pleased at this, quickly stretched out 
his arm and lifted him up on his feet, sa3ung,"My former 
minister Wei Vfei gave me a letter of introduction to 
you, and I am very glad to meet you." He pulled out 
the letter from his sleeve, and gave it to Tsui Ju, who 
tore it open and read. 

' From the Court of Justice of the Great Capital, I 
beg to present this letter to my Elder Brother Mr. Tsui. 
Formerly we were intimate, and your face and voice are 
-still before me. But several j^ears have now passed 
and I have had no opportunity of receiving from you 
more instruction, such as you often gave me before. 
But in my dreams I receive your advice, and thus know 
you have been highly promoted. But alas, we are now 
separated by the great gulf of life and death, and cannot 
see each other face to face ! Now, because my Emperor is 
gone from the living, his case will be brought before the 
courts of Hades, and he is sure to meet you. I beg of you 
to remember a thousand times our former friendship, 
and devise some means by which my Emperor Avill be 
restored to earth again without much difficulty, for which 
I shall be eternally grateful to you.' 

Judge Tsui was much pleased with the letter and 



118 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

said, "I know all about Judge Wei beheading the old 
Dragon in his dream. He has been kind to my 
descendant. Since I have received this letter about you 
to-day, you can set your mind at rest. I, your humble 
minister, shall not fail to have you restored to the land 
of the living, and to your throne again. " The Emperor 
thanked him. As they were talking, they saw approach 
two young men dressed in black, and carrying official 
umbrellas and streamers, who called out with a loud 
voice, " Yen Lo, the king of Hades, invites you in." 
The Emperor, accompanied by Judge Tsui and the two 
black robed young men, entered the portal. Suddenly 
there appeared a city, and over the city gate was written 
in large golden letters ; 

'THE GATE OF GHOSTS WHO ENTER THE 

UNDERWORLD' 
The black robed pages moved on with their 
umbrellas and streamers into the city and led Tai Chung- 
through the streets. On the street he saw his father Li 
Yuen and his two brothers. When these heard it said that 
the Emperor had come, they rushed on hkn before he 
could avoid them, and demanded his life. Fortunately 
Judge Tsui called a blue-faced big-toothed devil and 
ordered him to take them away, and thus the Emperor 
escaped. He had only gone a mile or two when he saw 
a palace roofed with jade, truly beautiful. The Emperor 
looked at the outside and saw it was built of precious 
stones. In front was a pair of lamps, behind them 
were the ten Princes or Judges of Hell, who descended 
the steps and came near, bowing most respectfully to the 
Emperor. (The names of the Judges are given in 



THE EMPEROR IN HADES 11& 

Chap. III. p. 38.— Tr.) The Emperor, out of respect to 
them, declined to go before them. The ten Princes said,, 
"Your Majesty is a ruler among men on earth, we are only 
rulers among ghosts and demons in Hell. It is your proper 
place to go first, you must not be too modest." The 
Emperor replied, "Praj' excuse my rudeness to you, I 
dare not discuss the relative position of men and 
demons." Thus the Emperor was obliged to go first, 
and they arrived at the Sun Lo Hall. 

After paying their respects they sat down as hosts 
and guest. After a while Prince Tsin Kwang bowed 
with his hands, and said, "The spirit of the Dragon of 
river King has charged your Majesty with having 
promised to spare his life, and then executing him. What 
about that?" The Emperor said, "I dreamed that the 
old Dragon had come to me and begged to be forgiven. I 
assured him that he need not fear. I did not then know 
that he had broken one of the laws of Heaven and 
should suflFer death for it. Judge Wei Wei, who looks 
after such cases, executed him without my knowledge. I 
had called Judge M'^ei Wei to play chess with me. Being 
tired, he fell asleep, and in his dream, knowing that the 
dragon had committed a crime deserving of death, 
had him executed. " The ten Princes bowed and said, 
"Before the dragon was born, the records of the life and 
death of South Pole distinctly stated that he would be 
executed by an officer on earth. We all know that. 
But he insisted on having the case tried and that you 
should appear here before the three tribunals. We have 
sent him to be reborn again, but now he troubles you to 
come here. We hope you will forgive our urgency." 



120 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

After this thej' ordered the officer in charge of 
the Book of Life to bring it at once. "How many years 
should His Majesty's life and honours on earth last?" 
Judge Tsui at once searched the records of all the Rulers 
on earth and saw the name of the Emperor Tai Chung 
of the Great Tang dynasty in the Nan Chen Pu Chow 
continent, and the statement he should reign thirteen 
years. Judge Tsui, alarmed at this, quickly got a thick 
brush and changed the thirteen into thirty-three years, 
(easily done with two strokes in Chinese. — Tr.) and then 
handed up the Book of Life- The ten princely Judges 
looked through the book, and saw that Tai Chung was to 
live thirty-three years. They asked the Emperor, 
"When did j'ou begin to reign?" He replied "Thirteen 
years ago." The Chief Judge, Yen Lo, said, "Your 
Majesty need not be alarmed, you have twenty more 
years to live on earth. Since you have come, we have 
carefully enquired into the matter. You can now 
return to earth." On hearing this, the Emperor bowed 
and thanked them. The Princes of Hades sent Judge 
Tsui and the executioner Chao to accompanj' the 
Emperor back. The Emperor, before leaving the Sun Lo 
Hall, kowtowed, and asked, "Are all well in my earthly 
palace?" The Judges replied, "Yes, all are well there, 
but we fear your younger sister has not long to live." 
The Emperor bowed again and thanked them, saying, 
"When I return to the world, I have nothing but 
melons to send you as a present." The ten judges 
rejoiced and said, "We have abundance of Eastern and 
Western melons, but have no Southern melons." Tai 
Chung said, "When I return home, I will send you 



TI-IE EMPEROR IN HADES 121 

some." After this tliey bowed again and separated. 

The executioner seized his flag and led the way . -Judge 
Tsui followed and protected the Emperor. They passed 
through a dark office, which was not the way they had 
come. Then the Emperor said to the -Judge, "We have 
surely lost the way . ' ' The Judge replied , " No . There is 
only one way to reach Hell and no return from it. 
Now we shall take your Majesty through the starting 
place for transmigration, in order, on the one hand, to 
let you see the underworld, and, on the other, to let your 
Majesty escape the round of transmigration." So the 
Emperor liad to follow these two men for some li. 
Then he saw a high mountain with dark clouds covering 
the bottom w^ith mist. The Emperor asked, "What moun- 
tain is that? ' ' The Judge said , " It is the chilly side of the 
shadow of death." The Emperor was afraid, and said, 
"How can I pass that way?" The Judge said, "Your 
JIajesty need not fear! We lead the way." The 
Emperor with fear and trembling followed his two guides, 
and passed by many courts, from all of which were heard 
fearful cries. The Emperor asked, "What is this 
place?"' The Judge answered, "These are the eighteen 
hells behind the dark mountain. " "By what names are 
these kuowm ?" the Emperor asked. The Judge i*eplied, 
" I will tell you : 

1. The hanging by the musscles hell, 

2. The dark mad hell, 

li. The deep furuace hell, 
4. The hell of Fengtu city, 
' 5. The tongue-pulling hell, 
(5. The flaying hell, 

7. The grinding men )iel!, for all sorts of disloyalty, dia- 
obedience, wickedness and hypocrisy, 



122 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

8. The pounding hell, 

9. The tearing on the wheel hell, for all sorts of unrighteous- 
ness and deceitful words, 

10. The icy hell, 

11. The unmasking hell, 

12. The pulling of bowels hell, tor using false weights and 
measures, and for cheating the ignorant and helpless, and 
bringing troubles on them, 

13. The boiling oil hell, 

14. The dark hell, 

15. The sword mountain, for violently injuring the good, and for 
secret wrongdoing, 

16. The hell of lake of blood, 

17. The hot hell, 

18. The balancing hell, for murder to get gain, for deejv 
scheming, for cruelty to animals and killing creatures. 

From these thej- cannot escape for a thousand j^ears, 
nor for ever, though they call on both Heaven and 
Earth to save them." 

On hearing this, the Emperor was greatly distressed. 
After proceeding a little further, he met a company of 
demon soldiers carrying banners, who knelt by the road- 
side and said, "The officer of the bridge has come to meet 
you." The Judge shouted to them to get up, and lead 
on. They led them across a golden bridge. The Emperor 
saw beside it a silver bridge. On the bridge were seve- 
ral good and honest people, just and honourable, who 
also carried banners, to meet them. 

Close by there was another bridge with bitter wind 
freezing the blood, and a continuous wailing. The Em- 
peror asked, " What is the name of that bridge?' ' The 
Judge replied, " Your Majesty, that is called the Bridge 
of Despair (NaiHoKiao). When you get among the 
living, do not forget to tell them of this bridge ! ' ' 



THE EMPEROR IN HADES 123 

It was a mile or two long, but only three narrow 
planks in width. Its height was a hundred feet, and the 
depth of water below was a thousand feet. It had no 
balustrades. Below, there were dreadful demons trying to 
snatch souls away from guardian angels. On the side of 
the bridge were struggling souls and demons. In the 
depths were sinful souls in dreadful agonies. On the 
withered branches of the trees there hung the corpses of 
concubines, who had quarrelled with their mistresses. 
Down a steep precipice crouched daughters-in-law, who 
had not respected their mothers-in-law, being bitten by 
serpents, and devoured by dogs as powerful as brass 
and iron . These were punished for ever in this RIVER 
OF DESPAIR. 

As they were talking, they found that those who 
had come to meet them on the bridge had already gone 
back. The Emperor was alarmed, for the Judge and the 
Executioner, whom he followed, were already crossing the 
dreadful bloody river, which was the boundary. 

Before them was the city where lived the spirits of 
those who had died unjustly. He heard them shouting 
from one to the other, " Li She Ming has come ! Li She 
Ming has come ! (the name by which he was known be- 
fore he became Emperor.) On hearing this shouting, 
the Emperor, trembling with fear, saw a company of de- 
formed ghosts with broken backs and arms, with feet but 
no heads, who stopped him and cried out, " Restore to us 
our lives ! Restore our lives ! " At this the Emperor was 
so terrified that he wished to hide himself. He called 
out to Judge Tsui, " Save me, save me!" The Judge 
said, " These ghosts are the innocent souls of those who 



124 JMISSIOX TO HEAVEN 

suffered wrongly with tlie sixty-four rebels, and the in- 
nocent souls of those who suffered wrongly with the se- 
venty-two robbers; thej- are without any redress, and 
cannot be reborn on earth, as they have no money for 
travelling expenses. They are all orphans, poor starving 
ghosts ! Your Majesty should give them some money and 
then I can save you." 

The Emperor replied, " I have come empty-handed 
here, how can I give money ?" The Judge said, " On 
earth there is a man who has gathered much gold and sil- 
ver, which he has stored up in Hades with me. If your 
Majesty writes an order for one of his stores of monej', I 
will become security for you. You can distribute this 
money among these starving ghosts, and thej^ will let 
you pass." The Emperor asked, " Who is this wealthy 
man ? ' ' The j udge replied , ' ' He is a Honan man in Kai- 
fengfu, by name Shang Liang. He has thirteen treasuries 
of gold and silver here. If 3-ou borrow from him here, you 
can repay him after you return to earth." At this the 
Emperor, greatly relieved, gladly wrote the order, and gave 
it to Judge Tsui, who borrowed a whole treasury and let the 
Executioner distribute it. The Judge then said to them, 
"Now take this money and divide it equally amongst 
you, and let your Emperor pass, as he has not yet finish- 
■ed his life on earth. I have been directed by the ten 
Judges to guide his soul back to earth again in order that 
he may establish a great societj'- to save. the souls of those 
who have perished on land or sea. So do not make any 
more disturbance ! ' ' When the hungry ghosts heard this 
and had received the money, they cleared the waj' for 
him. The Judge and Executioner then took up their 



THE EJIPEROR IN HADES 125 

flags for the guidance of the Emperor. Thus the Emper- 
or passed out of the city, where the wronged souls Hved, 
and went on by this great highway with flying banners. 
After a long time they came to the six roads of transmi- 
gration. 

The Emperor asked, "What is the meaning of 
this ?" The Judge said, "Your Majesty is clear sighted. 
Do not forget what you see now, and let it be known 
when you return among the living. These are called the 
SIX PATHS OF TRANSMIGRATION. The good 
ascend in their progress, the faithful are reborn in the waj' 
of the honourable, the filial are reborn to happiness, the 
righteous are born among men. the virtuous are born 
rich, but the bad will fall to hell into the path of 
demons.'' The Emperor nodded his head and took 
careful note of this. The Judge then led the Emperor 
to the path of rebirth that led to honour, and, bowing to 
him, said, "Your Majesty, this is your waj' out, j'our 
humble ofiicer must now return, but I have ordered the 
Executioner, Chu, to accompany you one stage more." 
The Emperor thanked him for accompanying him all 
this long way. The Judge said, "When your Majesty 
returns to earth, you must on no account forget to found 
the great Society, ALL SOULS, for the salvation of 
those homeless souls, who perished on land and sea. If 
there are no complaints in hell, then the people on earth 
shall enjoj' happiness. If all evils are redressed, and all 
men instructed how to be good, then I guarantee that 
your descendants will be long-lived and your Empire 
permanently safe." The Emperor took note of each of 
these things and bade the Judge farewell. 



126 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

He then followed the Executioner and with him 
entered the gate. The Executioner saw a horse inside 
the gate, already saddled, and urged the Emperor to 
mount it. When the Executioner had helped him up, 
the horse went off like an arrow and soon arrived at the 
banks of the Wei river. In the water were a pair of 
golden carp playing together. At this sight the 
Emperor was delighted, stopped the horse and seemed as 
if he would never tire of watching them. The 
Executioner said, "Your Majesty had better let the horse 
go on, so that we may enter the city earh"," but the 
Emperor was loath to leave the spot. The Executioner 
then gave the horse a kick and shouted out, "Why do 
you not go, what are you waiting for ?" With this he 
gave a push, and the horse plunged into the Wei river, 
and thus the Emperor left Hades, and returned among 
living men. 

At that time both the civil and military officials 
were gathered together about the heir, and the Empress 
Dowager and palace ladies were at the White Tiger Hall, 
weeping, and discussing how to put forth an Edict about 
the Emperor's death, so as to inform the whole empire, 
and announce the accession of the heir to the throne. 
But the minister Wei Wei said, "Let us wait one day 
more before doing this, as the Emperor's soul is sure to 
return to his bod3\" But one of the ministers stepped 
forward and said, "Do not listen to these strange words 
of Minister Wei. From of old who does not know that 
spilt water cannot be gathered up again, and that when 
life is gone it does not return? Why do you raise 
these false hopes?" Wei Wei replied, "I have had 



THE EMPEROR IN HADES 127 

some experience in these matters from my youthandknow 
well some things. I am sure the Emperor is not dead." 
At this moment they heard repeated loud cries 
from the coffin, "You are drowning me, you are 
drowning me ! " This terrified all the civil officers and 
military generals. The Empress and all the ladies of 
the court trembled with fear, and none dared approach 
the coffin. Happily the upright Duke Su Mao, the fiery 
Prime Minister Wei, the brave Chin Kiung, and the 
strong King Teh, went to the coffin and cried, "What 
is it that troubles your Majesty? Or is it some devil 
that is alarming the whole family?" Wei Wei said, 
"It is not a devil, it is only the Emperor's soul 
returning. Bring implements to open the cofiin at 
once ! ' ' They did so and then they saw the Emperor 
sit up, still erying, "You are drowning me! Who will 
take me out of the water?" Mao and others went 
forward and said, "Do not be alarmed! Your Majesty 
is waking up from a dream. Your ministers are all 
here looking after your safety." The Emperor opened 
his eyes and said, "I have come fi'om great trouble and 
have Just escaped from the hungrj' devils of hell and 
from drowning." The ministers asked, "What dangers 
were your Majesty in ?" The Emperor said, "I was 
riding, and when I got to the Wei river, I saw two fish 
playing with each other, and watched them until the 
wicked Executioner Chu pushed me into the river, and 
almost drowned me." Wei Wei said, "Your Majestj'^ is 
still ill and wandering. You must get the doctor at 
once to give you medicine to restore you to your natural 
health of body and mind." 



128 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

It should be stated that the Emperor had been 
dead for three days and nights when he returned 
to reign again. It was now evening and the 
ministers advised the Emperor to sleep and they all 
retired. Next morning they put off their mourning 
robes and appeared in their court robes, each with his 
red and black hat, purple silks, and badges, waiting 
outside the door to be called in. The Emijeror had a 
good sleep the whole night and was much refreshed. 
He rose at daylight, dressed, and went into the throne 
room to give audience to the civil and military officers. 

Then they heard an order, that those who had 
business should enter in their respective order, and if 
they had no business, they were to return to their homes. 
From amongst those on the East side Su Shi, \^'^ei '^^iei 
and others, from amongst those on the West side Yin 
Kai Shan, Hu King-teh and others, all went forAvard 
together, knelt and said, "Your Majesty had a long 
troubled dream this time before calling us to audience, 
what was it about ? " The Emperor then told them all 
about his journey to hell, and his return to earth, and 
then said, "\\'hen I parted with the tan Judges of Hell, 
I promised to send them a present of some melons. 
After leaving the Sun Lo Hall and seeing the faith- 
less, the unfilial, the rude and the unrighteous, the 
destroj-ers of harvests, those who cheat and insult both 
in public and in private, the users of different kinds of 
weights and measures for buying and selling, the 
thieves, and the licentious fellows, suffering the 
grinding, the burning, the pounding, the cutting in 
pieces, the flaying alive, and the thousand other 



THE EMPEROR IN HADES 129 

iranishments in hell, I was deeply grieved. Passing by 
the citj'^ of wronged souls, countless innocent ones, who 
suffer there, stopped me on the way. Fortunately, 
Judge Tsui becoming my security, I was able to borrow 
from Mr. Shang of Honan a whole treasury of gold and 
silver to ransom their souls, and thus was allowed to 
pass. Judge Tsui told me that on mj^ return to earth I 
was on no account to forget to establish a Society for the 
saving of the souls of all lost on land and sea, and the 
rescue of all homeless souls." 

"When the ministers heard these things, thej' all 
congratulated the Emperor, and made the news known 
throughout the empire so that all the officials might give 
thanks. The Emperor issued an edict to pardon all the 
prisoners of the 'empire. There were then over 400 
great criminals deserving of death, who were all releas- 
ed and set free to go home to see their parents and 
brothers, and stay with their relatives for one j'ear^ 
after which they were to return to prison, and await 
their punishments. All the prisoners were grateful for 
the grace. 

The Emperor also issued an order to relieve the 
helpless ones, and finding that there were 3,600 women, 
3"0ung and old, in the palace, he arranged marriages for 
them. After this all his subjects became very good. 

In addition to this, he issued everywhere, an edict as 
follows: — 

The Hea-ven and Earth are very great, the sun and moon 
shine everywhere, the universe is extensive, and there is 
abundance for all, without need of robbing one another, or 
scheming. Eewarda and punishments are found in tliis 
world. The good man does right in gratitude for past 



130 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

benefits, and seeks happiness without talk of the liere:it't(^r. 
Ten thousand kinds of scheming are not equal to the 
performance of one's duty. If one is tender-hearted, there 
is no need of much exercise in praytr. If one has a mind 
to rob others, one has studied good books in vain. 

After this there was not a man in the whole emiDire, 
Avho was not moved to virtue. 

There was also put out an edict calling for a 
volunteer to take the melons to Hades. 

Another edict was issued ordering the treasury to 
pay gold and silver to Prince Hu King-Teh of Wu, who 
was sent to Kaifengfu to seek Shang Liang, and to repay 
the Empei'or's deht. 

Some days after the issue of these edicts, there 
appeared a good man, who was willing to present the 
melons. He was from Kun Chow, by name Liu Chuen, 
and possessed some ten thousand strings of cash. But 
because his wife had given her hair-pins to a poor priest, 
he cursed her, saying she was unfaithful to him. The 
Avife could not endure the false accusation, so committed 
suicide, leaving behind her a little boy and girl, who cried 
night and day for their mother. The father could 
not endure their cries, and contemplated committing 
suicide. He was therefore willing to die and take the 
melons to Hades. He took the edict, and went with 
it to the Emperor. He was told to go to the Kin 
Hiang Eestaurant and carefully select a couple of South- 
ern melons to carry with him. On the waj^ he chewed 
some poison and died, and his soul took the melons to 
Hades. 

He soon got there and told the matter to the demon 
gate-keeper. The demon welcomed Liu most heartily. 



THE EMPEROR IN HADES 131 

and led him to the Suu Lo Hall where he saw Yen Lo, the 
Chief Judge of Hades and presented him with the me- 
lons, sajang, " I come to present these by order of the 
•distant Tang Emperor of China, in return for the 
kindness shown to him b}"^ the ten Judges." Yen Lo 
was much pleased, and said, " What a faithful and good 
Emperor he is." He received the melons, and asked the 
man his name and whence he came. Liu replied, " I am 
from Kun Chow and my name is Liu Chuen. As my wife 
had committed suicide, I was willing to leave my home 
and children, and to sacrifice my life for my Emperor, 
and therefore present the melons as my tribute. ' ' When 
the ten Judges heard this, they sent one of the demons to 
find the soul of Liu's wife, and bring her to see him. The 
Judges also looked up the record of the Book of Life. 
Both the husband and wife were to become immortals. 
Yen Lo said to the demon, " Go at once and bring her 
here." The demon replied, " She came to Hades long 
ago and her corpse has disappeared. Wbere can we put 
her soul?" Yen Lo turned up the records of life and 
death again. "The Emperor's sister Li Ju Ying should 
be dead now. Take her body and let the soul of Liu's 
wife occupy it." Having received his orders, the demon 
took Liu and his wife out of Hades. How the husband 
met the wife with a new body, and what difficulties 
occurred will be explained in the next chapter. 



CHAPTER XII. 
ALL SOULS' DAY 
Huen Chwang founds a great Society. 
Kwanyin recognises Huen Chwang as a visitor 
from Heaven. 

[outline.] 

The Emperor's own sister had suddenly died, and 
because the dead body of Liu Chuen's wife, who had 
committed suicide, could not be found, the Princess' 
body was given to her soul to occupy. 

The Emperor, seeing his sister reA-iving, began to 
congratulate the royal princess, but she, possessing the 
soul of Liu's wife, was indignant, saying she was not 
a princess, but the wife of a common man. 

In time notwithstanding a different body the hus- 
band and wife, remembering their former earthly ex- 
perience, were reconciled. 

The Emperor sent one of his Ministers to Kaifeng- 
fu in Honan in search of the man Shang Liang, who 
had laid up great treasure in Hades by his good deeds, 
and from whom the Emperor had borrowed. The 
Emperor sent an immense amount of gold and silver to 
repay the loan, but the man denied that he had lent 
money to the Emperor, and would not receive it. On 
hearing of the disinterestedness of the man and his wife 
in refusing the money, the Emperor ordered a temple to 
be built in honour of the family. The temple was 




Hi: 



II 



KWANYIM TIIE IFOLY SpiKIT 

The Dove and Rosary as symbols. 



ALL SOULS' DAY 133 

called the Shang temple. On the day of its opening, 
the people were ordered to select the best man in the 
three religions, Confucianism, Buddhism, and Taoism, 
to conduct the opening ceremony, and they chose Huen 
Chwang, the floating priest, the son of the famous 
literary wrangler, Chen Kwang Jui. Being deeply 
versed in all the Buddhist sacred books, he was appointed 
by the Emperor to be the head of all Buddhists in 
the Empire. The Emperor then called together 1 ,200 
priests for a religious festival in Chang-an, lasting seven 
times seven days, during which the chief priest, Huen 
Chwang, gave an outhne of the Buddhist Sacred books, 
and spoke of heaven, of hell and of the many on earth 
who had lost their way, and whom he desired to lead 
back to the truth. 

While this great movement was going on in Chang- 
an, the Celestial Ruler sent down Kwanyin, in search 
of a religious man to go to the West for Sacred 
Books. She heard that the priest Huen Chwang was none 
other than the Divine Kin Shen, who had become 
incarnate again to save men. Kwanyin and her 
disciple Mu-to appeared in the streets in very poor 
garments, carrjang with them a beautifully em- 
broidered cassock and a nine ringed pastoral staff, 
which they offered for sale. For the one they asked 
5,000 Taels and for the other 2,000 Taels. But the price 
was too high for anyone to pay. The Prime Minister, 
returning from the temple, heard of the articles and 
asked , ' ' What good is there in buying them ? " "He that 
possesses them will neither be reborn, nor fall into hell, 
nor be poisoned, nor be killed by wild beasts!" was 



134 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

the rep]5\ On hearing this, the Prime Minister 
dismounted from his horse, and thought these two magic 
things most suitable for Huen Chwang at the great 
Festival for the benefit of all who had died on land and 
sea. The Emperor wished to buy them, but Kwanj'in 
refused all offers of money, and presented them as a gift. 

On one of the chief days, Kwanyin, in poor 
garments, joined the throng, and listened for a time to 
Huen Chwang's discourse on several Sacred Books. 
Then Kwanyin called out to him in a loud voice, and 
said, "You have only explained to us Primitive 
Buddhism. Now explain to us the Higher Buddhism. 
Early Buddhism cannot save the dead, but Higher 
Buddhism can take them to heaven, can save men from 
trouble, can make them long-lived without being reborn 
again in this world. " 

The Emperor then asked for some one to volunteer to 
go to fetch the Sacred Scriptures of Higher Buddhism 
from the West. Huen Ohwang came forward and offered 
to go. So he was given a white horse to carry his 
baggage and started on his pilgrimage. 

"When the Emperor ordered the selection of an 
eminent Buddliist to establish the great Land and "^'ater 
Festival (All Souls' day) for the salvation of orphan 
souls in Hades, one of his chief ministers sent in a 
memorial, expostulating and saying: — 

' In the Western religion (Buddhism) there is no 
distinction of Prince, Minister, Father or Son, but 
that of the three worlds (heaven, earth and hell), 
and the six ways of transmigration by which the 
multitudes are deceived. Its followei-s dwell on the sins 




KwANYDi ATTENDS THE POUNDINa OP ALL SO0LS' DaT. 



ALL SOULS' DAY 135 

of the past, and speculate on the happiness of the future. 
They read Sanscrit prayers in the hope of avoiding 
deserved punisliment for evil. Short or long life depend 
on natural causes. Is man able to punish past sin or 
to predict future happiness? The present custom is 
merely to trust in powerful fate, and say it is Buddha's 
will, 

'Of old in the days of the five Emperors and three 
kings there was no such thing as Buddhism. The 
sovereigns were intelligent, the ministers were loyal and 
they lived long lives. In the days of Emperor Mingti 
of the Han dynasty, began the worship of the gods of the 
Huns (Buddhism). But the religion of the West 
according to its own teachers is not fulty to be believed.' 

The Emperor handed this memorial to his Ministers 
for discussion. The Prime Minister bowed and said, 
" Buddhism has existed for several dynasties, it leads 
men to do good, and stop evil, and thus indirectly helps 
the Government. It should not therefore be disallowed. 
Buddha was a Sage. Without Sages there is no law. I 
advise severe punishment for this opposition." 

The other minister, Chwan I, replied, " The Prime 
Minister follows a religion which will have no fathers, 
therefore there can be no filial piety in the nation." The 
Prime Minister's only reply was to bow and say that this 
talk would lead to the strife of hell. 

After this the Emperor appointed two other Ministers 
to inquire into this matter. They reported : ' Buddhism 
is purity and kindness. Though its God is unseen, the 
fruit of the religion is good. Emperor Woo of the Chow 
dynasty established the order of the three Religions. 



136 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

[This ia a chronological error commonly believed in 
China. Buddha was born about 620 B.C. and and died 
about 543 B.C. Tr. J Since then, down all the ages, 
Buddhism has been honoured, and the incarnations of the 
five great Patriarchs of Buddhism, and the appearance 
of Ta Mo are well known. From of old till now, 
all speak of the three religions as most worthy. That 
Buddhism should not be destroyed or done away with, 
we beg your Majesty to decide.' "With this the Emperor 
was very pleased, and said, "If any one hereafter ob- 
jects, let him be punished." 




The Master. Buddhist JIoxk, 

First followed Primitive Buddhism, 

Later converted to Iliglier Buddhism. 



CHAPTER XIII. 
THE MONKEY JOINS THE MASTER 

Falling into a Pit the Priest is saved by the 
Morning Star. 

The Priest receives hospitality on the confines 
of two countries. 

[outline.] 

Huen Chwang started on his journey to the West and 
arrived at Fa Yun Sze, where 500 priests received him. 
He said to them, " From the heart come all sorts of 
evil spirits. By the heart you can overcome them." 
As he went he was not certain of the road, and fell into a 
pit, where the chief of the evil spirits ordered his two 
sen-g-nts to be killed and served up a.s food. But the 
Priest was saved by the spirit of a bright star, who rode 
on a crane, and said, "I am the bright star from the 
West, and have come specially to save you. Further on 
you will be guarded by Divine disciples. Do not be dis- 
couraged on the journey." 

Later on he met Liu Pei Kin, the mountain guar- 
dian, who welcomed him as a fellow countryman, and told 
how he lived in the mountains among tigers, wolves, 
snakes and poisonous creatures. On the Priest protesting 
that he never ate meat, the women gave him vegetarian 
food, and he then gave thanks and ate. While there, the 
Priest offered prayers for the dead in his host's family. 
Finding him gentle and ignorant of the road, the host 
went with the Priest a day's journey. ' He could not go 



138 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

further, as they had arrived at the borders of the Tartar 
country, which he dared not cross. At the end of that 
journey a voice, with a sound like thunder, was heard at 
the foot of a mountain, crying, " Oh my Master, you have 
come, j^ou have come!" To learn what this great cry 
meant, you must listen to our next. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THE MONKEY CONVERTED 

The -wild beast Nature is changed, the five 
senses become obedient. 

[outline] 
The poem says: — 

" God is the heart, and the heart is God (Fo). The two are 

most important and should be inseparable. 
If you know tliat nothing is without a mind, that is the 

essence of the True Model. 
Tlie essence of the True Model has no form, it is a spark of 

light including everything. 
The bodiless is the real body, the formless is tlie real form. 
It has no colour, but is not notliing. 
It does not come, nor go, nor return. It i.s not different, it is 

not the same. 
It is neitlier possession nor loss. It is difficult to take or 

give away. 
It cannot be heard or counted on. The vital spark inside 

and outside is everywhere the same. 
There is a whole kingdom of God in one atom. 
There are numberless worlds in one grain. 
There is but one principle in body and soul. 
He who knows this must follow the mystery of nature. 
The pure is that which is untainted and clean. 
All the ways of good and evil are impotent. 
This is the teaching of the glorious Shakyamuni ! 

When they heard the thunder cry, " Oh my Master, 
you have come!" it frightened the Priest very much. 
But thej'^ said, " This must be the Monkey King crying." 
"Who is he?" asked Huen Chwang. "He is one that can- 
not be frozen or starved, and lives on nothing but iron 



140 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

pills and copper syrup. He has been imprisoned liere 
for 500 j'ears." 

Huen Chwang let him out of the prison under the 
mountain , and the Monkey King followed the pilgrhn as 
his disciple, and was given a new name which was Sun 
Hing Cliieh, not Sun, the Searcher of Secrets, or the 
Inventor or Discoverer, but Sun, the Practical One. 
They met a tiger which Sun the Practical killed. He 
used its skin to make fur clothes. Then they were sud- 
denly met by six robbers, viz., Mr. Eye, who loved change, 
Mr. Ear, who easily became angry, Mr. Nose, who smelt 
love, Mr. Tongue the Taster, Mr. Thought the coveter, 
and jMr. Sad the dissatisiied, who fell on Sun Hing 
Chieh, and beat him badl3^ But as his head seemed to 
be made of iron, the beating had no effect on him. 
Then he took out his magic needle from his ear, made it 
into his steel spear, went for them, and killed them all . 

The Master was angr}' with him for killing instead 
of correcting them, and rebuked him. Sun was not in 
the habit of being rebuked, and so fled away 18 ,000 li , and 
returned to the East, leaving his poor Master helpless by 
his white horse on the road. "When, greatty distressed, 
the ]\Iaster saw an old woman coming ; he was afraid 
of her, but she was none other than Kwanjun. After 
hearing his story of the loss of his disciple, she presented 
him with a robe (the cassock) and a hat which he was 
to give to the disciple when he came back. She also 
taught the Master some incantations which, when the dis- 
ciple was disobedient again, would make the spikes i^ierce 
his head like nails. Sun the Practical met a Dragon king 
in the East, to whom he told his story of having become a 



THE MONKEY COVBIITED 141 

Buddhist disciple. This Dragon said he must give up his 
old bad habits and become good. After he returned to 
his Master, Kwanyin said that if he did not tell the 
truth, and keep his vow to go with the Pilgrim, he would 
still remain only a demon, and must be prepared for the 
consequences as before. Sun promised amendment and 
they went on at once. How they fared afterwards you 
Biaj' learn in our next. 



CHAPTER XV. 

A DRAGON BECOMES A HORSE 

The Pilgrims protected in the snake mountain 
by the gods. 

The Dragon takes place of the horse. 

[outline.] 

The Master and his disciples travelled seA-eral days 
through the icy mountains, and were -(vounded by snakes 
and dragons. One dragon ate the white horse, and this 
terrified the Master. Sun said he would go and look for 
another horse. The Master would not let him go, lest in 
his absence he should be attacked by something worse. 
Sun was angry with the Master for not letting him go. 
Then a voice from the sky was heard to say, " We are 
guardian angels sent by Kwanyin to protect j'ou all the 
way. We are leaders of the Six Ting and Six Kia, the 
guardians of the five regions and the four King Tsao, all 
here to protect you." Then Sun left the Master in 
their charge and fought the dragon. 

He fought bravely, but the wild dragon could not 
be caught. Then it was proposed to ask Kwanyin to 
help. Kwanyin blamed the dragon for disobedience- 
He said he had never been told that the Master was the 
Royal Messenger going for the Scriptures. Sun cried 
out to Kwanyin, "Mistress of seven Buddhas, why is 
it that, instead of helping me, you give me that hat and 
the incantation which pierces my head?" Kwanyin 
reminded him that, although she had helped him many 
times, he had never thanked her. Fearing more trouble on 



M^^>t 



^-i #. 














Vx-j 



^f:=-<: 



\ 'Y?#"" 



•'-"O^fet 



"'''5^ti' 






Mihi 









^^^^^M\l V^ ^ 



^^.^i^'^^ 



uH^^^^-^^^ 



\&r,4??: 







A Dragon tbanspormed into a r:cRSE. 



A DRAGON BECOMES A HORSE 143 

the waj-, Sun said to Kwanyin, "I will not go further." 
Kwanyin persuaded him, saj'ing, "Whenever you pray 
to me in trouble, I will come and help you. Even now 
I will give you another gift." She took her willow 
sprig and cried, "Transform," and three leaves fell on 
Sun's head, and she said, "These have power to save 
your life whenever you are in danger." So saying she 
went and spoke to the dragon, and he became a white 
horse to carry the Master and they started on their 
journe}- again. Then an old man ferried them across 
the river, and was then spirited away. This was in the 
countrj' of the Lolos and the Uigurs. 

Travelling "West, they met an old man counting his 
beads, who api^eared very kind, giving the Master a 
saddle and a whip, which seeming kindness Sun doubt- 
ed. This was the god of Lo Kia Shan. (See end of 
chap. 17.) 

In the evening they saw what appeared to be a 
temple and the Master was pleased to see it, hoping to 
rest there. "What happened there you will learn in our 
next. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

MONKS STEAL THE MASTER'S CASSOCK 

The Priests at the Temple of Kwanyin cast 
longing eyes on the precious cassock. 

The demon of Black Wind mountain steals it. 
[outline. J 

Reaching the temple, the travellers entered, and 
asked for a lodging, and the abbot, an old man of 270, 
entertained them well with his best. Having learnt 
that they had come the whole way from China, he asked 
what precious things they carried with them. The 
Master said they had nothing precious, but the ISIonkey 
said, "Yes, we have that precious cassock." The priests 
laughed at the idea of reckoning a Ciissock as precious, 
and said they had scores of them, and brought out some 
lovely priestly robes to show them. The Monkey said, 
"Let me show my master's robe." The Master 
whispered to the Monkey that it was dangerous to excite 
their cupidity by showing it. At the sight of the robe, 
brilliant with all the colours of the rainbow, the abbot 
was bent on stealing it. 

One priest, named Great Knowledge, said, "The 
travellers are now asleep. They are only two, let us all 
arm ourselves, and kill them, and the precious cassock 
will be the abbot's." 

Another priest, named Great Schemer, said, "That is 
not a good plan, for it will mean some difficulty. As 
for that pewter-faced one, it is easy to kill him, but that 
hairy-faced one would not be easy to dispose of. Let us 



MONKS STEAL THE MASTER'S CASSOCK 145 

set fire to the temple and then say that the cassock was 
burned." It was so agreed and the priests brought 
firewood and piled it around. The Master slept, but the 
Monke}' was awake and, hearing the tramp of men, 
suspected something. He transformed himself into a 
bee and went out through one of the cracks and 
discovered what was taking place. At once he mounted 
the clouds, reached Heaven and asked for a shade to put 
over the place where his Master slept and over his 
cassock and that the wind should blow till everything 
else was burnt. In spite of this, however, the cassock 
disappeared ! 

Next morning, the priests denied all knowledge of 
the cassock. The Monkej'^ asked, "Is there a demon 
near here?" "Yes, in the Black Wind mountain, onlj' 
20 1ioff." "lam sure to find the cassock." He told 
the priests, whom he had called together, "You must 
take good care of my Master, and my white horse. If 
there is the slightest carelessness I will show you how I 
can beat A\ith my staff." Then he struck a burnt brick 
wall with his staff and seven or eight walls at once fell 
with his blows. At this every priest was paralysed with 
fear, and they fell on their knees and kowtowed, saying, 
"Have mercy on us. You can depend on us being 
faithful during your absence. " At this the Monkey 
was off on the clouds, and the priests, greatly terrified at 
all this, knew he was a god. What happened afterwards 
3'ou shall know in our next. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

KWANYIN HELPS SUN 
Sun very angry with the Black Wind demon. 
Kwanyin conies to tame the Bear. 

[outline.] 

There the Monkej' found the Demon in the Black 
Wind mountain. He was a black man, and on his left 
a Taoist, and on his right a white robed one, were talking 
of celebrating a birthdaj- with the precious cassock. 

Hearing them talk of the cassock, Sun Jumped 
down from the clouds, brandished his steel spear 
and said, "Return to me the stolen cassock, or j'ou shall 
answer with your life." "Who are you to talk to me 
thus? AVhat can you do?" said the Demon of the Black 
Wind. Sun then related some of his mighty deeds, and 
the two fought some ten bouts, but neither was victorious. 
The Demon then said, " Wait till I have had m}- dinner, 
and we shall go at it again." Now this meal was a 
birthday feast. Sun went back to the temple for his 
meal. On the way he passed a small demon carrying a 
card case. On opening it, he found that it was an 
invitation to the aged abbot at the temple, who was 270 
years old , to attend the feast. Sun transformed himself 
into the abbot and presented himself in order to 
steal the cassock when it w-as shown. But in this 
he was baffled. He then decided to go to Kwanyin 
once more, and charge her with complicity this time. 
She returned with him. On the way they met a Taoist 



KWANYIN HELPS SUN 147 

Shell M'ith Immortal Pills on a glass tray. Sun advised 
Kwanyin to transform herself into this Shen and pre- 
sent two Immortal Pills to the Black Wind demon. Sun 
then transformed himself into one of the pills, which 
were accepted by the Demon. When swallowed, Sun 
created such pains inside, that the Demon, in agony, 
returned the cassock, and Kwanyin took the Black 
"Wind Demon with her to India, Avhere he repented and 
promised obedience, and she ordained him to be 
guardian angel of Lo Kia Shan. (See end of Chap. 15.) 
She ordered the Monkey to take the cassock back to his 
Master and not to make a display of it again. If you 
wish to know what happened afterwards, listen to our 
next. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

KAO LAI CHWANG BATTLE 

The Master delivered from his imprisonment 
in Kwanyin's Temple. 

Sun the Practical conquers a Demon (Pa Kiei) 
at Kao Lai village. 

[outlixk] 
Next day the Master and disciple departed with 
their horse, but had not gone far before it grew dark. 
Seeing a village, thej' asked for lodgings, and met a man, 
who was in a hurry, going to look for an exorcist. His 
master, Tai Kung, had a daughter twentj' years of age. 
who three years before had married a demon, and the 
devil had lived, as son-in-law, with him ever since, 
treating his wife badlj^ and not allowing her to come 
out of her room. Sun said, "Take me to your home, 
and I will bring with me my Master, who is a great 
exorcist." On getting to the house, thej- heard the story 
from the father, who said that the demon not only 
abstained from eating meat, but seemed to have control 
over the air, travelling in a whirlwind of sand and 
stones. He had been a clever handsome man at first, 
but had become extremely ugh' with a snout like a pig 
and with long flapping ears. Sun said, "Show me 
where his room is," and armed with his steel club, 
he went behind to the room which was locked, and 
burst it open. The daughter was given to her father, 
who took her out. Then Sun assumed her form, and 




Chu Pa KiEi THE Pig. 



KAO LAI CHWANG BATTLE 149 

waited for the demon, who was in the habit of going 
away by day and returning by night. 

On his return there was a fierce quarrel between the 
two, and the Pig ran out of the house in a thousand 
fiames, followed by Sun, who mounted the clouds, and 
followed him saying, "Where do you go? If you go to 
heaven, I will follow you. If j'ou go to hell, you cannot 
escape me there. Return your so-called wife to her 
father." 

What happened after this you shall hear in our next. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

PA KIEI CONVERTED— HEART CLASSIC 
Sun receives Chu Pa Kiel as a disciple. 
Huen Chwang: receives the Sacred Creed in. 
the Fu Tu mountain. 

[outline.] 

The Demon Chu changed back into hig natural 
form, ran into a cave and brought out a nine-pronged 
spear with which to fight. Sun cried out, "Tell me 
what your skill is, and hand your weapons over to me, or 
I will kill you, false demon ! " When Chu was defeated, 
he told Sun, " Since I was born, I have been stupid and 
loved ease, night and day. But I met a Shen who told 
me the way of the immortals. He bade me repent and 
leave the common way of men, and make myself familiar 
with the waj' to heaven above, and hell beneath. I 
received the Pill of nine Transformations and studied 
all the arts by which man could be united to the 
Powers alx>ve and below, till at last I was able to 
fly with a light but strong body, and was a guest in the 
Celestial Court, where I freely mixed with all at the 
peach banquet. But getting drunk, I made love to some 
of the fairies, and was expelled to Fu Ling Shan, but by 
some mistake in transmigration, I got into the Avomb of 
a sow instead of that of a woman." 

" Oh, you are one of the water fairies sent down to 
live among men in Fu Ling Shan? " " Yes, and 5'^ou are 
that terrible Monkey, who made such disturbance, and 



PAKIEI CONVEETED— HEART CLASSIC 161 

got us all into trouble in Heaven !" They fought again 
and Sun was victorious, cureing him for marrying a 
good girl. 

Then the Demon asked if the father had sent for him. 
Sun replied, " No, I and my master were passing by on 
our way to fetch the Sacred Scriptures of the West, and 
he asked us to save his daughter." On hearing they 
were in search of the Scriptures, the Demon Chu at once 
fell on his knees. "I have been waiting for this 
Messenger for many years, take me to see him." He 
was led to the Master, and said he had kept the five com- 
mands and the three extra ones, fasting all this time wait- 
ing for him. "Let us now end our fast by eating 
nreat." " No, no," said the Master, " I will give you a 
new name." "There is no need for that, for when 
Kwanyin baptised me, she named me Wu Neng, Seeker 
of Streng-th." "Excellent", said the Master, "It fits 
well with the name of your fellow disciple, which is 
Wu Kung, Seeker of Truth. But I will also give you a 
new name Pa Kiel (eight commandments). 

Pa Kiel now bade farewell to his wife, as Buddhist 
priests, unlike Taoist priests, may not have wives. 

Seeing that he was going away -with the Imperial 
Messenger, his father-in-law presented him with a 
cassock, and two pairs of new shoes. He also offered 
them some two hundred Taels for expenses on the jour- 
iiey, but they were refused, as the priests were expected 
to live entirely on daily alms. 

The Master and his two disciples then started on 
their journey again. After a month and a half they came 
to the Buddha mountain, where they met a Religious Man 



152 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

■vvho knew Chu Pa Kiei. He congratulated him on 
the privilege of going to the West, and said, " The great- 
est difficulty lies not in the long distance, but will come 
from evil thoughts, which lead you astray. When beset 
by them, repeat the following sacred words. They will 
act as talisman." He then taught the following to the 
Master : 

The Buddhist Creed 
[Translated from the Buddhist Tripitaka, 
Nanjio's Catalogue No. 20. Tr.] 

Hail, self-existent Illuminator, who, in exercising 
deepest Wisdom, seest the unrealitj'^ of all that is reached 
by the five senses, and canst save from all troul^les and 
dangers. 

Sariputra (the Divine Seed?) , the Manifested is 
not different from the Eternal, and the Eterrial is not 
different from the Manifested. Thought and Action are 
also thu' mutuallj' related. 

The Divine Seed (?) is the Eternal in all laws of the 
Universe. He was never born, nor will ever die. 

He is neither clean nor unclean, is neither added to, 
nor subtracted from. He is without sorrow, and will not 
perish. He is without acquired AVisdom, because he has 
received none. 

The Illuminators depending on this Eternal Wisdom 
are without anxiety. Having no anxietj', thej' have no 
fear, and are free from impossible dreams and thoughts. 
They are eventuallj- immortals. 

All the Illumined past, present, and to come, depend- 
ing on this Divine "Wisdom, obtain the Highest Wisdom. 

Therefore know that this Divine Wisdom is a great 



PAKIEI CONVERTED— HEAET CLASSIC 153 

Divine Magic, a great brilliant Magic, the greatest Magic, 
and a Magic without a peer. 

It can deliver you from all kinds of troubles. ' This 
is a real truth without anj;^ falsehood. Therefore in re- 
peating this Magic Scripture, i.e. say (Revised transla- 
tion), 

Refnge, Refuge 

Refuge in the Wisdom of the Eternal Mind, 
Refuge in the Teachers of the Eternal Thought, 
May their race never fail! 
The Master had a good memory and remembered it 
all, and it has been handed down through all generations 
till nq-w, as the Primer of religion and of Buddhism. 
Then the Eeligious Man was about to rise to the clouds 
and depart, when the Master seized him and asked him 
the way to the West. The Religious Man smiled and 
said: — 

"The road is not difficult. 

Listen to me. 

Yon must cro?s a thousand mountains and a thousand 

streams. 
And you must pass through dark places, where fiends abound, 
If you come to ^yhat seems the end of all things, 
Have no fear but press on. 
Close your ears and tread on firm ground. 
Beware of the dark Pine forest. 
Fiends and foxes infest that road. 
Cunning spirits fill the cities. 
Demons abound in the mountains, 
Tigers usurp official place, 
Leopards keep the records. 
All lions and elephants are called Kings. 
A wild pig bears the baggage, 
The water fiend leads the way. 

The old stone monkey is no longer full of passion. You ask 
this disciple, he knows the way to Heaven." 



154 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

The Monkej' did not like his remarks, thinking tlK'\- 
were sarcastic. But Pa Kiei said, " Do not be suspicious. 
This r'eligious man knows a great deal about the past and 
the future." Then the Monkey said to the Master, 
" Mount the horse and let us go ! " How they fared on 
the road you shall know in our next. 



CHAPTER XX. 

THE MASTER CARRIED AWAY 
The Master in trouble at Hwang Fung Ling. 
Pa Kiei hurries forward alone. 

[outline] 
Religion springs from the heart, and rehgion dies at the heart, 
On whom does the rise and fall depend ? 
If it only depends on self, 
Wliy need we help from another? 
Strive to get blood out of iron. 
Put a ring through your nose. 
And fasten yourself to distant space 
And to the tree of nature. 
Without a break 

Recognize no traitor a? fri(Mid. 
Follow no artificial rules 

Lest you be deceived. 

Strike hard with your tist, 

But without malice. 
The apparent method is not real, 

The light of sun and of moon, 
Where lies their difference? 

These were the Master's reflections on the Sucred 
Creed. Having travelled on, they came to a village where 
they sought lodging, but the people were greatl}- 
frightened at the sight of PaKiei, with his long snout and 
flapping ears. So Sun advised him to hide his snout in 
his bosom and fasten his ears, to prevent them flapping. 
Food was served them, and the Master asked a blessing. 
At meat Pa Kiei ate ravenously. The host's name 
was Wang and he said, " Before j'ou there is a great 



156 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

mountain 800 li to cross, You should be well armed, as 
the mountain is full of robbers and demons." 

Thej^ started West again, but had not gone far 
when a terrible storm arose, which blew the Master from 
his horse, and a tiger came rushing on him , Pa Kiel took 
his nine-pronged spear and said, "Come on, I will soon 
finish you." At a touch of his spear, the tiger, 
who was really a wind demon said, "We are a parly 
sent ahead by the king of this mountain, to kill some 
mortals for dinner. What kind of Buddhist priest are 
you to carry deadly weapons like this?" Pa Kiel replied, 
"You are greatly mistaken to think that we are ordinary 
mortals, we are come from China, and are going to the 
West in search of Sacred Sci'iptures. " 

Meanwhile one of the Demon chief's generals 
seized the master himself, and carried him to the chief, 
who told him to be careful not to eat him, or harm him, 
as he had two terrible disciples, but to tie him only. 
Huen Chwang began weeping for fear. The Monkey 
and Pa Kiel had lost Huen Ctiwang because thej- had 
been deceived b}' the Demon who had taken the form of 
u tiger, and were chasing him down a mountain. But 
it turned out that the tiger was only a tiger's skin. The 
two disciples were in great distress, not knowing where 
their Master had been carried, but finally, thej'^ 
found him in a cave, called the Yellow Cave of the 
Yellow Ridge, and cried out, "Deliver up our Master at 
once, or we sliall destroy your nest! " At this the Demon 
chief was frightened, and said to his Tiger, "I sent jj^ou 
to catch some cattle to eat, why did j^ou bring the 
Buddhist Pilgrim?" The Tiger while running away 



THE MASTER CARRIED AWAY 167 

■R-as killed by Pa Kiei, Sun went to tlie cave for his 

ISIaster. Truly it was : — 

The Master when in difficulties meets a demon — 
But a peaceful disposition subdues the wildest demon. 

How they fared afterwards you will learn from our 
next. 



CHAPTER XXI. 
KWANYIN DELIVERS FROM FALSE DOCTRINES 

Invisible Powers raise up a town in defence 
of Religion. 

Kwanyin puts down the Wind Demon (of false 
doctrine. ) 

[OUTLIJTE.] 

Whilst tlie Demon chief in the Yellow Wind Cave 
was thinking of what to do, the Monkey outside killed a 
Tiger door-keeper. 

At this the Demon chief put on his clothes, took 
with him his trident and went out with a host of 
demon followers. At the sight of the Monkey, not four 
feet high, he laughed, and asked, "Who art thou to 
think that I cannot master thee easily?" The Monkey 
said, "Onlj"^ strike me and I shall grow." He struck, 
and the monkey at once was six feet, and then ten feet 
tall. They fought for a long time and neither was 
victor. Then the Monkey plucked a hair, chewed it, 
blew it out, and cried, "Change," and he was changed 
into ten, each a steel spear. At this the Demon chief 
opened his mouth as wide as ten feet and blew out a 
typhoon, which made the little monkej's turn about in 
the air like paper mills. At this the Monkey recalled his 
magic monkeys and fought alone. The Yellow Demon 
blew at him so hard that the Monkey could not open his 
eyelids and was blind. After this the Monkey went to 
a village to get eye medicine, and to lodge and rest for 



KWANYIN DELIVERS 159 

tlie night. His host said, "This is not ordinarj' wind, it 
is the epidemic wind of the ecstasy (San Mei) of false 
religion. 

It can blow till the whole world is dark, 
It can blow till gods and demons are baffled, 
It is so terrible that rocks are split by it, 
And men will perish ratber tlian give it up. 

The monkej'^ got a plaster for his eyes, from his host, 
and the two disciples went to sleep. On waking they 
found no town at all, all had vanished. But there were 
some papers, hanging on the branches of the trees, on 
which was written — 

The dwellers in this Shen village were not ordinary men, 
They defend the Truth witli Kia Lan lieavenly cures, 
They clear the sight with marvellous medicine. 
Strive to oppose falsehood, do not tarry near it ! 

The Monkey said to Pa Kiel, "Stay here and look 
after the horse and baggage. I will go to the cave, and 
fight the Demon again." This time he changed himself 
into a fly and flew inside and found the demons asleep. 
He flew behind to the inner room, and saw his master 
there, praying for the Monkey and Pa Kiel to come to his 
help. He lighted on the bare head of his Master and 
said, "I have found you, and we will rescue you." The 
hairy-faced Monkey heard the Demon say, "If Ling Ki 
Pusa, the most efficient helpful Kwanjdn, does not send 
help to the priests, we have nothing to fear." At this 
time an old man appeared on the road. He was asked 
where Ling Ki Pusa lived. He said, "At Mount Meru 
.3,000 li to the South," and disappeared, leaving a slip of 
pqjer, on a tree, on which was written: — 

Tell the Great Sage that I am Li Chang Kang the immortal 
wizard (Shen) 



160 MISSION TO HEAVEiN' 

On Mount ^leru there is a stafl' of a flying Dragon 
Whern K-nanyin formerly enrolled soldiers for Buddha. 

The Monkey left Pa Kiei to look after the horse and 
baggage, and mounting the clouds reached Kwanyin 
and appealed for help. She replied, " I have a pill for 
calming the wind, and a staff to conquer the Demon whom 
I ordered to behaA-e himself. But as he does not, I will go 
with you at once, to the Yellow Wind mountain. I will 
remain in the clouds, but you can descend to fight him 
again." Whilst they were fighting, Kwanyin threw her 
staff, with eight prongs like Dragon's claws, and the Wind 
Demon was wounded, and his true form as a yellow rat or 
weasel revealed, [The Chinese in the North, to this day, 
are reluctant to kill a weaseL as they think it powerful 
enough to bring trouble on them if hurt . Tr . ] — The Pusa 
said, " Do not kill him. He was once a rat in the base- 
ment of the Spiritual Mountain, and stole lamp oil so that 
the Celestial Palace became dark, and fearing punishment 
he fled. Let me take him to Julai for punishment." 
After this, Monkey arid Pa Kiei went to the cave, rescued 
their Master and started West again. But to learn how 
they fared you must listen to the next chapter. 



CHAPTER XXII. 
THE MONK SAND CONVERTED 
Pa Kiel fights hard in the Quicksand River. 
Mu-to converts Seeker of Purity. 

[outline.] 
Having gone a short distance, they saw a great flood 
like the sea, but there were no boats in which to cross it. 
The Monkey in a minute jumped into the air, crossed and 
returned, saying it was difficult. 
Quicksands 800 li wide, 
Weak water 3,000 11 deep 
It cannot float a feather. 
And a floating reed would sink. 

At this time a terrible Demon appeared on the bank 

of the river, and Sun flew to protect his Master. The 

Demon described himself: — 

A great traveller from my youth, 

I providentially met a Shen (Taoist Saint) 

Who taught me the way of the new birth. 

I extinguished all my passions, 

Had communion with heavenly beings. 

The Celestial King made me Chamberlain, 

Armed with sword and buckler 

I was leader of his bodyguard. 

But when the Queen of Heaven 

Ordered her peach banquet. 

By mischance some crystals broke, 

And I was sentenced to death, 

Happily a bare-footed Slien begged to spare my lite, 

I received eight hundred stripes 

And was banished to these Quicksands, 

Where to keep from starvation 



162 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

1 have eaten many a traveller. 
Witness this skulls around, 
To-day yon afford ine another meal. 

As this Pa Kiei and he fought. Sun went to heli>, 
but the Demon rushed back into the water, while the 
Master watched them from a little height. After two 
other unsuccessful fights, failing to get the Demon tf) 
come out of the water and fight on drj' land, they ^veut 
and told the Master their difficulty. The Monkey said to 
Pa Kiei, " Stay here with the Master, while T goto Kwan- 
3'in again." He Avent and told his story that they had 
fought the Demon three times without success. Kwan- 
yin asked, " Did you tell him that you were fetching the 
Sacred Scriptures? He is a discijale of mine, and if you 
had only told him so, you would have had no trouble. 
Hui An, take this red gourd, and go with Sun, and call 
for Seeker after Purity, and he will come and ferry you 
across." 

On being called the Demon emerged , and apo logized for 
the delay, because he did not know the Ambassador was 
there. He had already been received bj"^ Kwanyin as a 
disciple, and he was called Sa Wu Tsing, or Seeker after 
Purity. He was also called Sa Seng, (the monk Sand). 
His head was shaved, a raft was built, and the whole party 
w^as ferried across in no time, and landed without mud, 
all clean footed from the water and sand, and went their 
way westward. 

To learn how they got their reward and the Sacred 
Scriptures you must read on. 




Sa 1[() Siiant, tite Dan'dy Doli'hin. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

DOMESTIC AND ASCETIC LIFE 

The Master has not forgotten his God. 
The four saints practise self-restraint. 

[outline.] 

The Master said, " Let us rest at the next town for 
the night." The Monkey said, " Let us hurry on, eveiy 
place is equally our home." Pa Kiel said, " That is all 
very well for you to saj^ but I have a load to carry from 
day to day, do not forget that, and do not treat me as a 
common coolie. The horse is fat and strong and only 
carries the Master, why not put some of my load on the 
horse?" The Monkey said, " This horse was originally 
the third son of one of the Dragon kings, and as he broke 
one of the laws of Heaven he would have been killed, but 
for Kwanjdn's mercy in sparing his life, on condition that 
he should carry the Master. Carry your load yourself ! " 
On hearing this. Pa Kiel wondered. 

When night came they arrived at a house occupied 
by a widow and her three daughters, and asked for lodg- 
ing. The mother welcomed them heartily, and told them 
how she became a widow and was now well-to-do. What 
troubled her was that there was no husband, or son, or 
son-in-law, to whom to leave her teu thousand acres of 
land. " Now that we are four women and you are four 
men, is it not providential that you have come here?" 
At this speech the Master pretended to be deaf and dumb. 
She went on to say there were 300 acres of dry land, 300 



164 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

of watered land, 300 of orchard and forests, horses and 
cattle in droves, sheep and pigs without number, sixty 
or seventj'^ farms, clothing enough to last for years, and 
grain and silver in abundance. "You had better stay 
here and have a comfortable home without care, rather 
than the troubles of travel to the West." The Master 
was silent. She again spoke, "I am fortj'-five years old, 
my eldest daughter is twenty, the second eighteen, and 
the third sixteen. Noneof them are betrothed. They are 
skilful with the needle and embroidery, and having no 
sons, I got a teacher for them, in order that they should 
stud}' and sing, ' ' But the Master sat as if listening to 
frogs after rain , without saying a word . Pa Kiel , however , 
was much attracted by their beauty and wealth, and 
said to his Master, "You should be civil and give 
some answer." The Master was annoj'ed and said, "We 
priests should not be moved by these things, ^^"hat 
good is in them?" The widow smiled, and replied, 
"What a pitjM what good is there in leaving your 
homes and becoming priests?" 

In the spring we make spring clothes. 

In the summer we change into light silk garments, 

In the autumn there comes harvest home, 

In the winter we have banquets and wine, 

Every season of the eight abounds with fresh dainties, 

Every night we rest in warm embrace. 

How much better than to travel in search of Amitabha ! 

The Master replied, "Yes, that is true, but our life 
has also its advantages." 

The Priestly vows are uncommon, 
They give up their gracious homes, 
They do not speak of this world's good, 
They speak of another marriage, 



DOMESTIC AND ASCETIC LIFE 165 

When work is finished, they remove to Heaven , 

That is their soul's eternal home. 

This is better than to enjoy one's self below, 

AVhich ends in mortifying rottenness 

Truly when one follows the right way, one must be 

careful, 
One must put away the desires of the flesh and be true. 
How the foolish Pa Kiel fared afterwards, you 
must learn froru our next. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

SUN STEALS GINSENG 

The Saint or Wizard (Shen) of Wan Show- 
Shan entertains a friend. 

The Monkey steals ginseng at his Temple. 

[outline.] 

Next morning it was found that fairies had tempted 

them, and that Pa Kiei had succumbed. His repentance 

was in great sorrow and shame. 

On the mountains, flowers open and flowers fade, 
Clouds come and go, but the spring remains. 

They came to a land of beauty, and the Master said , 
"Be ready to arrive in Heaven (the land of Thunder) , and 
meet the Lord of the World." But the Monkey said, 
"It is far off j-et, eighteen hundred li. We have only 
travelled a tenth of the road." They had now arrived 
at the mountain of Everlasting Life (Wan Show Shan) 
the only spot in all the world where grew a root, which 
existed before creation, whose fruit ripened only once 
in 3,000 j^ears. This root was in shape like a perfect 
little child (Mandrake?). By smelling it, one could 
live 360 3'ears, and by eating it, one could live 47,000 
years. On the mountain M^as the Taoist Temple of the 
Five Villages. That day the God, the First Cause of 
All Things, had called an assembly to hear him explain 
the story of creation. 

The abbot of the Taoist temple took all his stud- 
ents of immoi-tality with him to hear, leaving two 



di 
he 
Gi 



SUN STEALS GINSENG 167 

of the youngest at home. The age of one was 1300 and 
that of the other was 1200 j^ears, and to them he said, 
"Soon there will arrive a Buddhist Priest from the 
East in search of Scriptures. He is the second great 
riple of the Incarnate Model, called Kin Shen. When 
iomes, treat him well. He is an old friend of mine, 
e him two ginseng magic fruits, which confer im- 
ortalitj-." The two youths replied, "Confucius tells 

inot to be friendly with those of a different religion. 
e belong to the Great Beginner," (the chief god of the 
loists) . By this time the Pilgrims had arrived at a 
"autiful place, on which was written : — 

The Palace of the Immortals, where they live and never 

grow old. 
They are good wizards who live as long as the heaven and 
earth. 

The two Immortal youths welcomed them and led 
them to the temple. Above the door was a newly 
made beautiful Tablet, on which was written two words 
only: — "Heaven and Earth". The Master went in, 
burnt incense, and then said, "Yom* Temple is beautiful, 
worthj' of Heaven itself. But why do you not worship 
the Three Pure Ones and the Four Emperors of Heaven? " 
(North, South, East and West?) They answered, "There 
is a suitable place for ever3i;hing. In this place our 
Abbot does what is suitable for him. To-day he has 
been invited by the First Cause of All Things to come 
and listen to his teaching about the origin of things." 

Later on, there was a difference of opinion over the 
ginseng, which they M'ere to give Huen Chwang as a 
rare gift, but which Huen Chwang said was like a new- 
born baby, and indignantly refused to eat. But the 



168 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

/ 
disciples had heard of its rare value, and wished to tspte 
it, so they stole some out of the thirty in the orchard , 
but, fearing the consequences, all three decided notito 
confess, and returned into the hall, where inquines 
were being made. 

But what was finally done you will hear in \he 
next chapter. 




Sun Steals Ginseng. 



CHAPTER XXV. 
THE PILGRIMS ARRESTED 
The Taoist Abbot expels the Royal Messenger. 
The Monkey gets into a rage in the Taoist 

Temple. 

[outline.] 

The Master called his disciples, and asked which of 
them had stolen the sjinseng, and said, "If you have done 
so, confess and apologize. ' ' But the two Immortal youths 
were rude, and made the disciples so angry that they 
went to the orchard and destroyed all the trees. Alas ! — 

When the ^Master reached the Hill of Everlasting Life (Wan 
Show Shan) 

The Monkey stopped the growth of Fruits of Immortality. 

The leaves were fallen, the trees uprooted, 

The two Immortal youths were terror-stricken. 

The two youths said, "We cannot fight them, for 
they are four and we are only two. Let us cheat them. 
First apologize to the Master, give them a good meal, and 
then lock them in that room, till our Abbot returns." 

This they did, but the Monkey, bui-st open all the 
doors and they all went their way, leaving the j-ouths fast 
asleep, with sleeping insects (like tsetse flies.) The abbot 
of the Temple returned, followed and arrested them, and 
took them back to his temple, where he tied them, each to 
a tree, to be flogged. But the Monkey transformed some 
willow trees into the likeness of the party and in this way 
they escaped. They were caught again, and when the 
Monkey was beaten, he changed his legs into wrought 
iron. Later, when about to be boiled in oil, he changed 
a stone lion into his form, to take his place. How the 
matter ended, you will hear in the next chapter. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 
WATER OF LIFE EEVH'ES THE TREES 
The Monkey seeks a remedy in three islands. 
Kwanyin puts a living fountain by the trees. 

[outline.] 
The Poet says : — 

To be religious, one mnst have a keen edge to one's ear. 
One must ever keep close to one's conscience. 
Steel is hard, but steeled hearts are harder, 
The humble-minded never is a fool. 

The Shen Abbot said to the Monkey, "You have 
presumed too far this time. There is a day of reckoning. 
I "will go with you to the AA^est and get back my ginseng 
tree from Buddha himself.' ' "Is that all, why did j-ou 
not tell me before? If you go on with my Master as a 
guide, I will bring you a living tree." The bargain was 
made, and the Monkey went in search of the old Physician . 
who could make the dead live. He fii-st went East to the 
Islands of the Immortals and found three persons playing 
chess, the angels of the Star of Long Life, the Star of 
Happiness, and the Star of Wealth. On seeing the Mon- 
key, one said, "Great Sage, you have left Taoism and 
have followed Buddhism, how is it you come to see us 
again? Have you stolen ginseng, the vegetable root of 
immortality, Avhich far surpasses our laborious mechani- 
cal method ? ' ' The Monkey said , ' ' That is nothing, I can 
replace it. Give me a recipe for restoring it." They 
said, " We can heal wounds, but cannot restore life. 
The Monkey then said, "Since you cannot, I go else- 



WATER OF LIFE REVIVES THE TREES 171 

where to Tung Hwa*, the Eastern Celestial Emperor." 
Having arrived there, he told the Emperor of his 
quest. The Emperor replied, " We can cure living be- 
ings, but cannot cure trees." At this the Monkey left 
for Yungchow and asked the same question, but none 
could tell him a remedy. He then directed his course to 
Putu, where Kwanyin resided at the Tsze Tsu Lin, and 
met the Black Wind Demon, who was now changed, and 
doing good works as a disciple of Kwanj-in. He said, "I 
am grateful to you, Great Holy One, for sparing my life." 
The Monkey was invited to see Kwanyin, to whom he told 
his story. She said, " Do not be troubled, I have drops 
of water that M'ill restore your trees to life. ' ' She at once 
returned with him , and although the trees were dead and 
uprooted, by application of the drops, they were fully re- 
newed, leaves and fruit were produced and ten ginsengs 
were picked and shared by the assembled immoi'tals and 
even the Master ate one of the immortal fruit. The Mon- 
key and the Shen Taoist Abbot became sworn brothers. 

How they parted again, you will hear in the next 
chapter. 

* Note. — The East Gate in Petin? ;s named after this. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 
THE MONKEY DISMISSED 
A Demon thrice deceives the Master. 
The Master dismisses the faithful Monkey King. 

[outline.] 

Starting again, the Master felt he had new life in 
him. Soon they came to a mountain, and the Master told 
the Monkey to go and beg some food for Mm, as he was 
hungry. Sun said, " How foolish you are to ask me to 
beg on a mountain, where there are no living beings." 
However, mounting a cloud, he saw in the distance some 
peaches ripening, and made for them. 

In the meantime a fair}' came, saying that she had 
brought some food to give to the travelling priests. But 
it was a witch with some poison, and the Master would 
have taken it but for the IMonkey, who returned 
with the peaches j ust in time. He suspected the witch 
and killed her, but he was blamed by the Master for 
his vengeance, and he would have been dismissed, but by 
begging hard he was permitted to continue, on condition 
lie behaved better. 

Then tliere appeared an old woman of eighty, whom 
tlie Monkej' attacked and killed. On they went, and 
met an old man, reciting his prayei"s on the road side. 
Pa Kiel said, "This old man must be a relative of the 
women just killed." So Sun struck him dead. Pa Kiel 
said to the Master, " This is terrible. The Monkey is the 
source of all our trouble; three persons killed in one 



THE MONKEY DISMISSEJ) 173 

day. Is this worthy of priests?, you should repeat the 
imprecation and let the spiked hat enter his head . " The 
Monkey said, " Pa Kiei is a fool, do not listen to him! 
These are all demons, thej- cannot fool me. jMaster, look 
at this heap of bones. They are not of those just killed. 
You are fooled by their magic. ' ' But the Master Irad 
made up his mind to dismiss the Monkey, and give him a 
letter of dismissal. The Monkey thought of the many 
troubles and daiigers from which he had saved his Mas- 
ter, and thought it hard that he should listen to the 
slanders of the fool Pa Kiei . Pie bade his fellow disciples 
take good care of the Master, and with tears in his eyes, 
left in the direction of his old cave in the Mountain 
Orchard. 

To hear how he went and came back again, you 
must listen to what follows. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 
THE MONKEY WELCOMED HOME 

At the Mountain Park all the monkeys meet 
and discuss. 

At the Dark Pine forest the Master meets a 
demon. 

[outline.] 

The Monkey arrived at his old home, the Water- 
fall Cave. It was 500 years since he saw it last, and 
he was struck with the ruin everywhere. The two gods 
and the seven brothers(p. 82) had burnt everj^thing, and 
he was greatly distressed. Then a few monkeys appeared 
timidly, and when they knew who he was, they were 
delighted beyond measure, and gathered round him, 
telling of all the cruelties practised on them, their dead 
being eaten, and the living having to make sport for 
their Masters. "How is it that you, whom we heard had 
started with the Master, to fetch Sacred Books from the 
West, are back again with us?" The Monkey King 
said, "I went with him and delivered him from a 
number of dangers, and destroyed many fiends and 
demons, who would have killed him. But he does not 
know now to employ men. He thinks me a cruel man 
and has dismissed me, never to engage me again." 

Hearing of the Monkey King's return, the new 
rulers who were oppressing them came to attack him. 
The Monkey King gathered all the stones of the 
mountain into one heap, and sent the little monkeys to 
hide inside the cave. Then there was a sound of drums 



THE MONKEY WELCOMED HOME 175 

and over a thousand men and horses made a charge. 
The Monkey King with one big breath gathered together 
all the stones and then blew forth a terrible stone storm 
which annihilated all his enemies. He then laughed 
with great joy, and said, "My master often said, * Be 
good for a thousand days, and it is not enough; do evil 
for one day, and it is more than enough*. Now I will 
order the restoration of the Mountain Park and Forest 
and Waterfall Cave, and will enjoy myself in peace." 

As for the Master, he soon got into difficulties. 
Pa Kiel led him into a dark forest. The Master told him 
to go and beg for some food. Pa Kiel left him in the 
forest, and went in search of houses, where he could get 
food, but he could find none. Pa Kiei became over- 
powered with sleep and, seeing some straw, rolled into 
it, and slept. Sa Seng, finding that Pa Kiei did not come 
back, went to look for him, and the Master, when 
neither returned, became alarmed, and went on alone. 
Seeing some light, he made for it, thinking he could get 
some food, but it was a Demon's trap, and he was caught 
in it. The Demon rejoiced greatly at the prospect of 
enjoying human flesh and thus becoming immortal. But 
the two disciples came, and discovering that their Master 
was inside, attacked the Demon. 

To see how the Ambassador was saved after all, 
vou must listen to our next. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

THE MASTER SAVED BY A PRINCESS 
Deliverance from a calamity by a Princess. 
The fortunate Pa Kiel comes through the 
forest. 

[OUTLIN-E. j 

The two disciples fought thirty times without being 
vanquished by the Demon, for the Master, who was 
bound inside, was praying for them. He also wept, 
fearing that he would be murdered, althongh he knew 
that his time had not yet come, 

Then a woman of about thirty years old entered 
and, seeing the Master, asked him who he was. She 
told him she was a Princess from the Elephant Country', 
and had been carried away bj- this Demon thirteen years 
before. If the Master would deliver a letter to her father 
on his way to the West, she would unbind him and let 
him go. This was agreed on, and through her help, the 
Master and his disciples were able to escape. 

Having passed through a dark forest, they arrived 
at the court of the Princess' father, where the Master 
delivered the letter begging for rescue from the Demon 
husband. The king put this request before his military 
men, but being only mortal men they were afraid to 
attack Demons, who came and went at will in the air. 
He asked if any of the pilgrims had fought successfully 
with Demons. Pa Kiei and Sa Seng said that they had 
done so, and were willing to go back to deliver the 



THE MASTER SAVED BY A PRINCESS 177 

Princess. Pa kiei exhibited some of his magic tricks, 
such as stretching himself to eighty feet in height, and 
then went off in the air. The monk Sa Seng followed 
him in the air, to the great astonishment of all the court, 
and travelled through the Pine Forest to the Demon's 
cave, and fought desperately some eighty or ninety 
bouts, but in vain. They and the horse were bound in 
the cave. 

To hear how they finally escaped with their lives, 
you must listen to what follows. 



CHAPTER XXX. 
THE DRAGON HORSE'S INTELLIGENCE 
Evil natures attack tlie good. 
The intelligent horse knows who can help. 

[outline, j 

The two disciples went back to fetch the Princess, 
but they were no match for the one Demon. He would not 
allow the Princess to go, but said he would go himself 
and pay his respects to his father-in-law. When he 
arrived there, he accused the Master of imposture. He 
said that it was the Master, in the form of a Tiger, who 
had carried the Princess away, thirteen years before, and 
was now pretending to fetch Sacred Books. By his magic 
the Demon changed the Master into a tiger, and frighten- 
ed the King and all the Ministers terribly. After that the 
Demon drank wine, called for songs and dances in an 
outrageous manner. The Master's dragon horse could 
suffer this no longer, and said to Pa Kiel, "If j'ou wish 
to save your Master, you must send for help. You and 
the monk are no match for the Demon . " " Where can we 
get help?" "You must send to the Mountain Garden for 
the Monkey." Pa Kiel said, " I am afraid he will be 
angry with me and kill me, because I blamed him for 
killing those demons, who appeared as two women and an 
old man." "No, the Monkey King is a great and kind 
King. Tell him that the Master speaks of his ability and 
kindness often, and would like to see him." 

Pa Kiel, therefore went to the Mountain Garden, 



THE DRAGON HORSE'S INTELLIGENCE 179 

where he interviewed the Monkey King . But the Monkey 
did not seem anxious to leave his beautiful place, and 
Pa Kiel began to doubt his sincerity in serving the 
Master, or in his religion, and said so in the hearing of 
some of the monkeys. These told the Monkey King of 
Pa Kiel's surprising suspicions. At this the Monkey King 
was very indignant, and ordered them to fetch him back 
&t once. 

How he was treated by Sun you must hear in our 
next. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 
RECONCILIATION— SUN SAVES HIS MASTER 
The words of Pa Kiel excite the Monkey King. 
Sun subdues the demons. 

[outline] 

It is righteousness 

Which religion arouses from the soul, 

All forces work together for good. 

Even the monkey heart, when it tastes immortality, 

Makes for Paradise. 

All rehgions meet in one centre. 

Sacred books are only general guides. 

Buddhism follows the original God. 

All leaders are harmonious brethren. 

Demons and fiends have to submit to nature. 

When they cut off selfish pleasure, 

They join in the grand harmony of life. 
The little monkeys dragged Pa Kiel back to the cave 
and the Great Holy One began to curse him for his du- 
plicity. Pa Kiel denied it. But the Great Holy One said, 
" You cannot deceive me; my left ear, turned upwards, 
hears every word in all the 33 heavens, and my right ear, 
turned downwards, hears everything down to the ten hells 
of Hades." The Monkey King went West to see how his 
Master was. There he found that the D.emon was one of 
the Celestials, and that the Princess of the country, had 
been one of the Celestial fairies, who desired to try the life 
of men. The Monkey King then restored order in the court 
of the Princess' father, and transformed his Master from 
being a terrifying tiger, into his usual form. The Mas- 
ter was most grateful to the Monkey King for coining to 



SUN SAVES fflS PIASTER 181 

his rescue, and forgiving the wrong that had heen done to 
him, and added that when he returned to China he would 
tell the. Emperor that he owed his safe travelling more to 
Sun the Truth-Seeker than to any one else. The Prin- 
cess' father wished to give a handsome present to the 
travellers for their expenses, but the pilgrims would not 
take any. After this the King returned to his palace and 
his safe Elephant Kingdom, while the Master went on 
towards the Thunder Temple to worship Buddha. 

What befell them on the way you will hear in our 
next. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

PA KIEI NEGLECTS TO WATCH 
Hears evil tidings on Ping Ting Shan. 
Pa Kiel meets trouble in the Lotus cave. 

[outline.] 
(Lotus Cave. Part I.) 

The Master left the Elephant Country, and he and 
Practical Sun became bosom friends. 

Seeing a mountain ahead, the Master told his dis- 
ciples to be careful. Sun said, "Master, do not say that, re- 
member that the Sacred Creed says, 'So long as your heart 
is right, there is nothing to fear.' " After this Practi- 
cal Sim carefully watched Pa Kiei, who cheated in all he 
did. While professing to be on watch, he slept most of 
the time, but Sun discovered all. Arriving at Ping Ting 
Shan, they were approached by a woodcutter, who warned 
them of their danger, saying, " In this mountain of 600 
li, there is a Lotus Cave where there is a band of demons 
with two chiefs, lying in wait for the Royal Messenger 
from China to devour him and his party." Then the 
woodcutter disappeared. After this Pa Kiei was ordered 
to be on the watch for the demons on the mountain. But 
on the way, seeing some hay, he lay down and slept in it. 

Finallj'^ Pa kiei, by his foolishness, was carried away 
to the Lotus cave. 

How lais life was saved there you must learn from 
our next. 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 
LOTUS CAVE DEMON'S MAGIC 
Heretics miss the way. 
The Original Spirit helps the true heart. 

[outline] 
(Lotus Cave. Part II.) 

The demons seeing a light cried out, " There is the 
Master, ' ' for they knew that a wonderful light, Uke a halo, 
shines above the head of a good man. "He is Kin Shen, 
who has again descended among men. Ten times he has 
come down to earth to do good to men." 

On seeing Pa Kiel, the second chief said, "He is no 
good, you must go out in search of the Master and the 
Monkey." At this time the Monkey, to keep his Master 
from fear, walked ahead of the horse swinging his club 
up and down to right and left several times. The 
Demon king was on the top of the mountain peak watch- 
ing them and he said to himself, "I have heard much of 
this monkey and his magic, but I will show that he is no 
match for me ; I will yet feast on his Master.' ' Therefore 
he came down from the mountain, and transformed him- 
self into a wounded lame man on the road side, in order 
to appeal to the kindness of the Master. The Master, out of 
pity, persuaded the Monkey to carry him. Whilst on the 
Monkey's back the Demon, by magic skill, threw Mount 
Meru on Sun's head, but the Monkey warded it off on 
his left shoulder, and walked on. Then the Demon threw 
Mount Omei on his head, and this the Monkey warded off 



184 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

on his right shoulder, and walked on, to the great surprise 
of the Demon. Lastly the Demon, by another magic 
spell, made Tai Shan to fall on his head. This at last 
staggered and stunned the Monkey. The Demon then 
hurried after the Master and put his arm round him 
At the sight of this, Sa Seng drew forth his staff, but 
it was no match for the starry sword of the Demon. He 
carried off Sa Seng under one ai-m, and the Master 
under the other, and took them to the Lotus Cave, and 
called out, " Brother, I have now caught all the priests 
and brought them here." The chief replied, "It is no 
good unless that mighty Monkey is caught." 

It was then arranged that two young Demons 
should take the yellow gourd of one, and the jade vase 
of the other, as the most precious things the two demons 
had, to bottle the Monkey in them. They were to take 
them upside down and call out the Monkey's name, 
and if he replied, he would be found inside them, and 
the Demons were to seal them up, with the seal of the 
Ancient of Days. 

When the Monkey found himself crushed under 
the three mountains, he was greatly distressed about 
his Master, and cried aloud, "Oh Master, you delivered 
me from under the mountain before, and trained me in 
religion, how is it that you have brought me to this pass, 
where I am under the mountains again? It is a thousand 
pities ! If you must die, why should Sa Seng and Pa Eaei, 
and the dragon horse suffer needlessly?" Then his 
tears fell like rain. 

The spirits of the moimtains and the local gods 
wondered at jthis. The guardian angels of the Five 



LOTUS CAVE DEMON'S MAGIC 185 

Religions asked, "Whose is this mountain, and who is 
crushed under it?" The local gods replied, "The 
mountain is ours, but who is under it we do not know." 
"If you do not know, we will tell you. It is the Great 
Holy One, the Equal of Heaven, who rebelled there 600 
years ago. He is now converted and is the disciple of the 
Chinese ambassador. How dare you lend your mountain 
to the Demon for this?" The local gods and the 
guardian angels then read some prayers and the 
mountains were removed, and the Monkey delivered. 
He sprang up, brandishing his spear at the spirits and 
local gods, and they at once apologised and kowtowed, 
saying that the Demons insisted on their serving 
them daily in turns. On hearing that the gods had to 
serve the Demons, the Monkey was astonished and cried 
out in agony, "Oh High Heaven! since Thou hast 
created me, how is it that Thou hast also created these 
Demons?" 

Whilst talking thus. Sun saw some light approach- 
ing and asked, "What is that?" The spirits who served 
the Demons said, "This light comes from the Demon's 
magic treasures which shine like lamps. We are afraid 
they are brought out to catch you." Then Sun said, 
"Now we shall have some sport. With whom does the 
Demon chief associate?" They replied, "The man 
whom he loves most is a Taoist, who is daily engaged in 
preparing some chemicals." The Monkey said, "Return 
all of you, and I will catch them myself," and he began 
by transforming himself into the very image of the 
Taoist. 

Meeting the two small demons. Sun told them he 



186 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

was in search of a famous Shen among them, and asked 
them to show the way. In conversation he drew from 
them that they were going to catch the celebrated 
Monkey, and that they had two magic treasures, a gourd 
and a vase, by which to catch and bottle him. They 
showed them to him, and added that the gourd, though 
small, could hold a thousand people. "That is nothing, " 
replied Sun, "I have a gourd which can contain all the 
heavens." They were amazed at this, and bargained 
with him, that if he gave them his gourd, it was to be 
tried whether it could hold all the heavens and if so, 
they wonld give him their gourd and vase. The Monkey 
went to heaven and obtained permission, through Prince 
Na-to, to stop the light of the sun, moon and stars for one 
hour. Then at noon the next day all was absolutely 
dark, and the little demons marvelled greatly, and 
believed the Monkey when he told them that the reason 
of the darkness was that he had put the whole heavens 
in his gourd, and therefore there could be no light. 
They therefore handed over the two magic treasures, the 
gourd and magic vase, to the Monkey, and he gave them 
in exchange his false gourd. 

After this Sun mounted on the clouds and arrived 
at the South Gate of Heaven , where he thanked Prince 
Na-to for his valuable help. The Monkey then stood 
looking at the outwitted young demons. To know what 
happened afterwards you must read our next. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

SUN OUTWITS THE DEMON 

The chief Demon skilfully plans to trap the 
Monkey. 

The Great Holy One surpasses his cunning^. 

[outline.] 
(Lotus Cave. Part III) 

When the two young demons found that Sun had 
cheated them of their gourd to hold men, and had 
given them a false one to hold the heavens, sun, moon 
and stars, they told all to the two chiefs, who said, "It is 
Sun who has outwitted you, by pretending that he was 
one of the Immortals. We had five magic treasures and 
now we have lost two, the govird and the vase. There 
still remain three, the magic sword, the magic palm, 
and the magic rope. Go and invite our dear grandmother 
to dine on human flesh." Sun himself went, personat- 
ing one of the demons, and was invited inside. He told 
her that he wanted her to bring with her the magic 
rope, with which to catch Sun. She was delighted and 
started in a chair carried by two fairies. 

After travelling some four or five li, Sun attacked 
and killed them and discovered they were foxes. Sun 
carried away the magic rope, and thus had three of the 
magic treasures in his possession. Then he changed the 
dead to appear like the living, and returned to the Lotus 
cave. Small demons came running, and saying that the 
old lady was killed. Being frightened, the elder Demon 



188 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

king proposed to let the whole party go. The younger 
brother said, "No, let me fight Sun. If I win, then we 
shall eat them, if I fail, then let them go." 

The Demon called out to Sun, "Do not go away. 
I want to fight you agam." After fighting some thirty 
bouts, Sun lost the rope, and the Demon by the use of 
the magic rope lassooed him and carried him to his 
cave, and took back the magic gourd and vase, and the 
two chiefs rejoiced greatly. Sun now transformed 
himself into two false Demons. One he placed, instead of 
himself, in the lasso bound to a pillar, and as the other, 
he reported to the second Demon chief that Sun was 
struggling hard, and suggested that a stronger rope be 
used lest the other should break. Then by the change, 
Sun obtained possession of the magic rope again. After 
that, by a similar trick, he obtained the magic gourd 
and vase back. 

How Sun finally saved the Master you may hear in 
our next. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

GOOD OVERCOMING EVIL 

Heretics by violence despise the right way. 
The upright heart, having found a great treas- 
ure, overcomes them. 

[outline.] 
(Lotus Cave. Part IV) 

Originally the heart is in harmony with the Divine, 

But when canght in the various nets of the world, 

It finds it not easy to avoid mistakes. 

The attainment of immortality is not by following the many. 

It is one's lot to meet both good and evil. 

All the world has its appointed calamities 

Throughout countless ages, 

But there remains a Divine light shining through the gloom. 

The Great Holy One and the Demons wrangled 
much about the respective merits of their gourds, which, 
each assured the other, could imprison men, and make 
them do their own wish. Finally the Great Holy One 
succeeded in putting one of the Great Demons in his 
gourd. 

After that they had another fight concerning the 
sword and the palm fan, the magic treasures of the De- 
mons, and during the fight the fan was burnt to ashes. 
The fire was not ordinary fire. 

But that spark which nothing in nature can extinguish; 
It blazed, and all the world was red with its flames. 

They continued fighting several times, and Sun gra- 
dually gained ground against great odds, and put the se- 
cond Demon in the magic vase, and sealed it with the seal 
of the Ancient of Days. Then the sword was delivered 



190 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

and the demons submitted to Sun. He returned to the 
cave for his Master, swept it clean of all evil spirits, and 
they marched off on their Westward j ournej% Soon on the 
roadside they met a blind man crying, " Where are you 
going, Buddhist Priest? I am the Ancient of Days! 
Give me back my magic treasures first. The gourd is my 
property, in it I keep the Pill of Immortality. The 
jar is where I keep the Water of Life. The sword is that 
which I use to subdue Demons. The fan is that which I 
use to stir up enthusiasm. The cord is that which I use 
to bind bundles with. One of these two demons used to 
look after the gold crucible. They stole my magic 
treasures, and ran away to the world 6l human beings. 
Fortunately you have caught them, and deserve great 
reward." But Sun replied, "You should be severely 
punished for letting your servants do this e-^-il in the 
world. ' ' The Ancient of Days said, "No, without these 
various trials, your Master and his disciples could never 
gain perfection of character!" 

Then Sun understood and said, "Since you have 
come yourself for the magic treasures, I return them to 
you. ' ' After receiving them, the Ancient of Daj^s and his 
two Shen servants went away, one on his right and the 
other on his left, and returned to the Teu Suai Mansion 
in Heaven again. What happened after this you must 
hear in our next. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 
REPENTANCE GIVES LIGHT 
When the Monkey heart repents, it is re- 
conciled to the -ways of Providence 

It begins to see light and can answ^er sceptics. 

[OUTIINE.] 

(PaoLinSze. Parti.) 

They had not travelled far before the Master cried 
out, " There is a mountain of difficulties ahead of us, we 
must be careful. ' ' The Monkey said, ' ' Master, do not be 
over anxious. So long as our hearts are right with God, 
there cannot be any serious trouble." As the sun was 
setting, they saw a temple where they asked for lodging. 
But the Abbot of Pao Lin Sze was very rude, and said that 
if they went on some thirty li, they would find an inn and 
lodging. The Master asked why he did not treat them 
well. The Abbot said, "We sometime have to suffer for 
others' sins. Formerly some poor priests came and beg- 
ged for lodgings. I took pity on them, gave them food 
and clothing, but they stayed on for several years, think- 
ing more of their keep, than of religion." 

When the Monkey heard of this refusal of lodging 
to his Master, he said to him, "You are far too gentle. 
Let me go and see the Abbot." The small novices ran 
in terror, to say that a man, with a hairy face and no 
cheeks, had come, and was very angry. The doors were 
shut against him. But the Monkey with his spear burst 
open the door, smashed the stone lions at the gate, as if 
they had been only of glass, and said, " Inside here, you 



192 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

have room for hundreds of priests, and yet j'ou cannot 
give lodgings to these four ! ' ' When he found the Abbot, 
he began beating him badly. The Abbot cried for mercy, 
and SUn said, "Yes, I will show mercy on one condition. 
Bring out your five hundred priests, properly dressed, 
and give a proper welcome to my Master, or I shall beat 
you still more." 

After this the Abbot both beat the great drum and 
rang the great bell, and the priests came running, and 
wondering what was the matter. When they were 
arranged in order, they fell on their knees, and welcomed 
the Master suitabty. After supper, the Master dismissed 
all except Sun, Pa kiei and Sa Seng, his three disciples. 
He took them out with him and said, "Look at that 
wonderful moonlight. It makes me long for the time 
when I can return to my dear old home." 

The Monkey, on hearing this, said to the Master, 
"You enjoy the beautiful light and long for home. 
You do not think of the Great Purpose before the 
Sun and Moon w^ere created, and how they are made 
to revolve from month to month without fail. This is 
a mystery. One thing is clear, what is not born is 
immortal." 

The Master said, "My disciples, you are all tired, 
go to sleep while I read a chapter of my Sacred Books." 
The Monkey said, "Are you not now travelling to get 
the Sacred Books of Higher Buddhism, how can you 
read them?" "Oh, I read over my old books lest I 
forget them." 

If you want to know how the Pilgrims left the 
temple, you must listen to our next. 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 
A KING'S CORPSE IN A WELL 
A dead King's spirit visits the Master at night. 
The Monkey transforms himself into a babe. 

[outline.] 
(PaoLinSze. Part II.) 

When at the Pao Lin Sze templSj the Master had a 
strange dream, in which the spirit of a King of the 
Wu-ki country* appeared to him and told his history. 
During a long drought he was deceived by a Demon who 
slew him, and threw him into a well in the palace garden 
where he had remained for three years, after which the 
Demon had assumed his form and usurped his throne 
and deceived everyone. He begged the Master to allow 
his disciple Sun to rescue him. In proof of the truth of 
his story, be left behind a bar of white jade. 

The Master told his dream to the Truth Seeker, who 
thought there must be truth in it, and departed to seek 
the palace. The Master then chanted: — 

Religious vestments we need not heed, 
But the inward true Model is free from the dust of earth, 
The perfect character is seen through a thousand stitches. 
Pearls and jewels must harmonize with the Great First 

Spirit, 
Ministering angels respectfully serve, 
Devout monks will be sent to purify our lives. 

For three years, the garden had been closed, and no 
one had been allowed to enter. The King's son was not 

•Sopposed to be Karshar. (See Beale.) Tr. 



194 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

permited to see his mother, for the Demon, having 
transformed himself into the same form as the King, was 
not suspected by the officials, who obeyed all his orders. 

After a series of magic arts, Sun transformed him- 
self into a two-inch babe, and hid himself with the piece 
of white jade in a small box, which was presented to the 
Prince when he came to the Pao Lin Sze temple. After 
this the Prince met the Master, who told all his dream. 
The Prince recognised the piece of jade as his true father's 
and was told : "If you do not avenge your father's 
death, you have been born in vain!" But the Prince 
remained still in some doubt. Sun therefore said, " Go 
straight back to the palace and see your mother in pri- 
vate, and hear what she will tell you." 

What happened afterwards you will learn in the 
next chapter. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

THE QUEEN QUESTIONED 

The Prince finds from Ma mother the differ- 
ence between the true, and the false King. 

When metal and wood are tested, -we discover 
the difference. 

[outline] 
(Pao Lin Sze. Part III.) 

Now after the Master had seen the soul of the King in 
a dream, the Queen also had a similar dream. The Prince 
learnt from her what had happened to his father. It wag 
decided that Sun should attack the Demon usurper. But 
first he wished to find the corpse of the murdered King. 
So he and Pa Kiel went into the garden. Sun pointed to 
a palm tree, and ordered Pa Kiel to dig^ underneath it. 
Beneath it was a heavy slah, which when removed dis- 
closed a shining surface. Pa Kiel cried, "Here is a 
mirror of light ! ' ' But it was a well whose waters reflect- 
ed the moonlight. Sun then ordered Pa Kiel to descend 
and recover a treasure he should find there. At the bot- 
tom he found an entrance into the crystal palace of one 
of the dragons of the deep. On asking for a treasure, 
Pa Kiel was shown the body of a dead man in a yellow 
robe, with a crown on his head. This he was allowed to 
take up to Sun. 

When the Monkey saw the corpse, he told Pa Kiel 
to carry it to the temple, where the Master was resting. 
This he refused to do, but Sun gave him twenty blows 



196 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

with a heavy rod, and at last he carried the corpse to the 
temple. "Wiien the Master saw the corpse, with all the 
appearance of a live man, he wept to think of the usurper 
taking possession of the countrJ^ Pa Kiei laughed at 
him, " Master, he does not belong to your family ! Why 
should you be so distressed?" The Master replied, " The 
true Buddhist is always full of pity. Why are yo^u so 
heartless?" 

Pa kiei replied, " I am not heartless. Brother Sun 
said he can make the dead live. Do j'ou think I would 
have troubled to carry the dead corpse here, if he had not 
said so?" The Master then called for Sun and told him 
to restore the dead to hfe. " It is better to save a man's 
life than to build a seven-storied pagoda!" Sun replied, 
" Why do you believe that fool's talk? When a man 
dies, his soul returns only in the 3rd week, the oth week 
and the 7th week, but never after. This man has been 
dead for three years; how can you expect him to live 
again? ' ' The Master assented. 

But Pa Kiei became angry and cried, "Do not be 
deceived by Sun. He is quite able to restore the dead to 
life if he choose. Recite the incantation to cause the 
spikes of his hat to pierce his head, and make him restore 
this man to life ! " So the Master recited the incantation, 
and the Monkey's eyes became swollen and his head 
began to pain. 

How the dead was restored, you shall hear in the 
next chapter. 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 
THOUGH DEAD, SHALL LIVE 

One grain of life can gain Heaven. 
After three years' death, the King is made 
alive. 

[outline.] 

(PaoLinSze. Part IV.) 
San, the Great H0I3' One, suffered such terrible pain 
in his head that he begged the Master not to repeat the 
incantation any more, as he could not endure the pain. 
"I will make the dead live!" The Master said, "How 
can you do so?" Sun replied, "I -n-ill descend to Hades, 
and beg that the King's spirit be allowed to return to his 
bodj"-." But Pa Kiel said, "If you cannot give life to 
him without yourself descending to Hades, where is 
your power? Master, do not let him deceive you. Go on, 
repeat the incantation." Sun, feeling the great pain 
again, said, "lean save him without going to Hades." 
The Master said "How can you do that?" "I will 
ascend to Heaven, to the Ancient of Days, and beg for 
the Pill that restores the soul nine times from death." 
He did so, and returned with the Pill, and the dead was 
raised alive. 

In the West there is a secret by which to find the truth, 
Gold and straw and copper are tried by fire, 
The devout spirit is inspired with spiritual vision, 
The babe regrets it has no gift but a swollen body, 
But it'grows like its father in the womb, 
And like the Ancient of Days in heaven. 
The earthly must be lost before one gains the heavenly, 
Truly salvation comes from the Providence of God. 



198 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Then the question arose, how to restore the true 
King to his kingdom, and how to punish the Demon. 
When about to kill the Demon, Wen Shu Pusa appeared 
and told the true history of both the King and Demon. 
The King had done wrong and the appearance of the 
Demon in his place was a punishment permitted by- 
Heaven. After this, Wen Shu Pusa returned to Wu 
Tai Shan in Shansi. 

What happened after the Master and his disciples 
left the city, you shall hear in our next. 



CHAPTER XL. 

THE RED CHILD 

Before experience, man's vicious nature is 
po-werful. 

The Disciples help to tame the Demon. 

[outline.] 
[The Red Child Demon . Part I. J 
Having restored the dead King to his throne, the 
Pilgrims took leave of the Court and went on their 
journey. 

By the autumn the travellers arrived at a great 
mountain. On the way, there appeared a red cloud 
which the Monkey thought must he a Demon. It was a 
Demon child of seven, who, in order to entrap the Master, 
had himself bound and tied to a branch of a tree. The 
child cried again and again to the passers-by to deliver 
him. Sun, the Practical, would not let the Master deliver 
the child, as he was certain it was only a trick to catch 
them all. Finally the Master could not endure the boy's 
cries for deliverance. He ordered his disciples to unloose 
the naked child, and the Monkey to carry him. 
When your virtue is great, your trials are great, 
When religion is not active, inactivity produces devilry. 
When the heart is upright, yon walk in the right way. 
But if your mind is foolish, you make mistakes. 
As they went on their way the Demon caused a 
great whirlwind to arise. Whilst sheltering himself from 
the wind, the Master was carried away by the Demon. 
Sun discovered that the Demon was an old friend of 



200 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

his, who, centuries before, had pledged himself to eternal 
friendship with Sun, so he comforted his comrades by 
saying that be was sure no harm would come to the 
Master. It should he remembered — 

Witliout experience passions are strong, 

Tlie passions rule tlie judgment. 

To learn how the child turned out listen to our next. 



CHAPTER XLT. 

LED BY PASSION 
The -wild passions are set on fire. 
The soul is captured by the Demon. 

[outline] . 

(The Red Child Demon. Part II. ) 
Men when wise reach a state, 
Where good and evil are effaced, 
Fame and failure ne'er disturb, 
Cloud and sunshine are alike, 
Eat and drink when needs arise. 
Well, their spirits calm remain, 
111, the demons trouble them. 
Wise men, vexed by life's turmoil, 
Find in temples rest and peace. 

The travellers reached a mountain of dry pine 
forests, where they found the Demon in his cave, looking 
forward with pleasure on feasting on the Buddhist 
Priest. When Sun appeared, the Demon refused to 
recognise their old friendship, and after insulting 
altercation, thej"^ fought, and the Demon burnt every- 
thing, so that the smoke might blind Sun. Being thus 
blinded and beaten, he could not find his Master. In 
despair he said, " I must get the help of someone abler 
than myself.' ' Pa Kiel was sent to fetch Kwanyin. The 
Demon took a magic leather bag, in which to imprison 
Pa Kiel and, transforming himself into the shape of 
Kwanyin, invited Pa Kiel to enter the cave. The fool 
went in, and directly he entered, he was seized and 
placed in the bag. Then the Demon appeared in his 



202 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

true form, and said, " Now you see who I am. I am the 
naked child, and I mean to cook you for my dinner. A 
fine man to protect his Master j'ou are!" Then the 
small demons announced the arrival of Sun. The demon 
then called his six strong generals named, Mist in the 
Clouds, Spreading Fire, Fleet as tlie Wind, etc., who 
came kneeling for orders. He ordered them to accompany 
him to fetch his father, the Ox-headed King, to dine on 
the Pilgrim, and they disappeared. Meanwhile Sun 
opened the bag where Pa Kiei had been imprisoned, and 
both went out of the cave after these six generals. 
How they fared you shall hear in our next. 



-/. \-v',-,- 







KWANTDJ SAVES THE Red ChiLO. 



CHAPTER XLII. 

COlSrVERTED BY KWANYIN 

The Great Holy One hastens to the Southern 
Ocean to fetch ETKranyin. 

K-wanyin is merciful and binds the naked 
child. 

[outline.] 

( The Red Child Demon . Part III. ) 

After the generals left, Sun thought, "Since the 
Demon has played a trick on Pa Kiei, I will play 
a trick on his generals. " So he hurried on in front of 
them, and changed himself into the form of the Ox-head- 
ed King waiting for them. The generals were solemnly 
invited into his presence, and the Demon child, the 
spokesman, said, " If anyone eats a slice of the Pilgrim's 
flesh, his life will be prolonged indefinitely. Now he is 
caught and I invite you to feast on him. " Sun, per- 
sonifying the father, said, "No, I cannot come, I am 
fasting to-day. Besides, the Pilgrim is in charge of Sun. 
If harm comes to his Master, you will surely suffer, for 
he has seventy-two magic arts. He can make himself so 
big that your cave cannot contain him, and he can make 
himself as small as a fly, a mosquito, a bee or a butterfly." 

After this, the Monkey went south to Kwanyin for 
help. She gave him a bottle, but he was surprised to 
find he could not move it. "No," said Kwanyin, "for 
all the ocean forces are stored there." Kwanyin took it 
np with ease, and said, "This dew water is different from 



204 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

the Dragon -water and can put out the fire of passion. I will 
send a fAirj with you on j'our boat. You need no sails. 
The fair}' only needs to blow a little and the boat floats 
at will without any effort. " Finally, the Demon child, 
having been caught, repented and begged to be received 
as a disciple. Kwanyin baptised him and blessed him, 
giving him the name of Steward. 

Thus a few words can gain innumerable blessings. 

The law of life is infinite. 

How the Steward got on, you will know in our next 
chapter. 



CHAPTER XLIII. 

BLACK RIVER DEMON 

The demons of the Black Water Kiver carry 
a-way the Master. 

The Western Dragon catches them and lets the 
Pilgrim go. 

[outline.] 

After Kwanyin had said some prayers, the Steward 
commenced his duties by paying due respect to Kwanyin. 
When Sa Seng, who was still waiting at the Pine forest, 
saw Sun returning, he was very glad. They went in and 
unbound the Master, and told him of the conversion of the 
new disciple, on hearing which, the Master fell on his 
knees facing the south, and thanked Kwanyin. They 
then marched westward for a month. 

One day the Master cried suddenly, "What is that 
noise?" Sun said to the Master, " You are afraid, you 
have forgotten the Heart Prayer, which says that we are to 
be indifferent to all the calls of the senses. The eye must 
not look at the beautiful, the ear must not be attracted by 
music, the nose must not seek sweet fragrance, the tongue 
must not long for fine flavour, the body must be indiffer- 
ent to heat or cold, the mind must not have vain desires. 
These are the Six Thieves. If you cannot suppress these, 
how do you expect to see God?" The Master thought 
awhile and then said, " disciple, when shall we see the 
Incarnate Model (Julai) face to face?" 

Pa Kiel said, " If we are to meet such demons as 



206 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

these, it will take us a thousand years to get to the West. " 
But Sa Seng, the Sand Monk, said, " Both you and I are 
stupid; if we persevere and travel on, shoulder to shoul- 
der, we shall reach thereat last." Whilst thus talking, 
they saw before them a dark river in flood, which the 
horse could not cross. Seeing a small boat the Master 
said, " Let us engage this boat to cross over." Whilst 
crossing the river in it, they found that it was a boat sent 
by the Demon of the Black River to entrap them in 
midstream. 

The Demons were about to kill the Master,- when 
Sun with the help of the Western Dragon came to the 
rescue, and delivered him from their grasp. He was 
then ferried across and put on his way. Truly : — 
The Buddhist monk was saved to go to the West, 
And crossed over the Black Biver in peace. 
How the Pilgrims saw Buddha and got the Scriptures 
you shall hear later. 



CHAPTER XLIV. 

SLOW CARTS' COUNTRY 

The spiritual life fortunately gets help from 
above. 

When the heart is right the devil is driven 
back. 

[OUTLINK. j 

(Slow Carts' Country. Part I.) 
Having crossed the Black River, they travelled West 
against wind and snow. All of a sudden they heard a 
tremendous shout as of ten thousand voices. The Master 
was alarmed, and the disciples made wild guesses as to 
what it was. Sun laughed and said, "Let me go and 
see." He rose up on the clouds and saw a city, outside 
of which there were thousands of priests and carts full of 
bricks and all kinds of building materials. This was the 
city where Taoists were respected, and Buddhists were not 
wanted. The Monkey, who appeared among the people 
like a Taoist, learnt that the country was called the Che 
Chih(Slow Carts) country, and for twenty years had been 
ruled by three Taoists who had succeeded in getting rain 
during drought. Their names were Tiger, Deer and Sheep. 
They could call up wind or rain, and change stones into 
gold with ease. The Monkey said to the two leading 
Taoists, " I wonder if I shall have a spark of good luck, 
and can see your Emperor." They said, " We will see to 
that after we have attended to business." " What busi- 
ness have you religious people?" They said, ' ' Formerly, 



208 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

in the time of drought, when our Prince ordered 
Buddhists to pray for rain they were not answered, then 
Taoists prayed and got rain. Since then all the Budd- 
hist priests have been our slaves and coolies, bringing 
materials for building as you see. We must appoint them 
their work first and then will come to you. " Sun said, 
"Do not trouble, I am in search of an uncle of mine, who 
is a Buddhist priest from whom we have heard no word 
for j'ears. He may be here among your slaves. ' ' They 
said, " You can look and see and let us know if you 
find him." 

Meanwhile Sun went round to look for his relative. 
Hearing this many Buddhist priests surrounded him, hop- 
ing he would recognize one of them as his lost relative. 
Then after a time he smiled. They asked why he smiled . 
He said, " "VVhy do you not improve and progress? You 
were not given life to be idle or stagnant." They said, 
" We cannot do anything. We are terribly oppressed." 
' ' What power have your priests?" " They can by magic 
call up wind or rain." "That is a small matter," said 
Sun. " What else can they do? " " They manufacture 
the Pill of Immortality, and change stone into gold." 

Sun said, ' ' These are also small matters, common 
to many. How did these Taoists deceive your King ? " 
" The King reads prayers with them night and day, ex- 
pecting to attain permanent life without death. In this 
way the King believes in them. " "Since things are in this 
state, why do you not all go away?" " Sir, you do not 
know that we cannot go awaj', for the King has authoris- 
ed a picture of every one of us to be made, and these are 
hung up everywhere. This Slow Carts' country is ex- 



SLOW CARTS' COUNTRY 209 

tensive with prefectures, counties, and market places, and 
a picture of the Buddhist priests is in each place, with a 
notice saying that any official who catches a runaway 
Buddhist priest will be promoted three degrees, and that 
every non-official who catches a Buddhist priest will get 
fifty taels. This is signed with the King's own hand. 
Thus you see we are helpless." Then said Sun, " You 
jnight as well die and end it all." 

They replied, " A great many have died. We priests 
in this country at one time numbered over two thousand, 
but we perish in our sufferings. Six or seven hundred 
have already died, seven or eight hundred have commit- 
ted suicide. There now remains only about five hundred 
of us and we cannot die. Eopes cannot strangle us, 
swords cannot cut us, we plunge into the river to drown 
ourselves, but float on top instead of sinking; we take 
poison, but it does not kill us." Sun said, "Then you 
are favoured, you are all immortals." "Alas, that is 
not all, we are only immortal for suffering. In the day 
we get only poor food. At night we have only this sand 
to sleep on. But at night there come spirits amongst us 
and tell us in our dreams not to kill ourselves, for there 
will come an Arhat from the East to deliver us. W^ith 
him there is a disciple, the Great Holy One, the Equal of 
Pleaven, most powerful and noble and tender-hearted. 
He will put an end to these Taoists and respect us Budd- 
hists." 

Inwardly Sun was glad to hear that his fame had 
gone abroad. He then left the Buddhist priests and 
returned to the city gate. There he met the two chief 
Taoists. They asked him if he had found his relative. 



210 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

He replied, "Yes, they are all my relatives!" The two 
smiled and said, " How is it that you have so many 
relatives?" Sun said, " One hundred are my father's 
relatives, one hundred are my mother's relatives and the 
others are my adopted relatives. If you let all these 
priests depart with me, then I will enter the city with 
you, otherwise I will not enter." " You must be mad to 
talk in this way to us. These priests are all royal gifts 
from the King. If you had only asked for one or two, we 
could have arranged it. What you ask for is altogether 
unreasonable." Sun said to them three times, " Do 
you really mean not to liberate them?" When they 
finally said they could not, Sun became verj' angry, 
took his magic spear from his ear and shook it, and their 
heads fell at once. 

When the Buddhist priests on the sand saw this at 
a distance, they ran and cried, "Murder, murder, the 
Taoist superintendents are being killed," and surrounded 
Sun , saying, "These priests, our Masters, go to the temple 
without visiting the King, and they return to their homes 
without taking leave of their King. The King is always 
spoken of as the chief priest. How is it that you come 
and make trouble here and kill his disciples? The 
Taoist chief priest will now say that we Buddhist priests 
have killed them. What shall we do? And if we go 
into the city with you, we are afraid you will have to pay 
for this with your life. ' ' Sun laughed and said, * ' Friends, 
do not trouble yourselves about this. I am not 
Master of the clouds, but I am Sun the Practical, 
the Great Holy One, a disciple of the Holy Master from 
China, seeking Sacred Books in the West, come to save 



SLOW CARTS' COUNTRY 211 

you." They all answered, "No, no, you cannot be, for 
we know him." He replied, " You have not met him, 
how can you therefore know him?" They replied, " We 
have often seen him in our dreams. The angel of the 
planet Venus has described him to us and warned us not 
to make a mistake." " What did he say to you?" They 
replied, " He has a hard head, bright eyes, a round face 
and a hairy face without cheeks, sharp teeth, pointed 
mouth, hot temper, uglier than the Thunder god. He uses 
a steel club, made a disturbance in Heaven itself, but is 
now a penitent, and is coming with the Buddhist pilgrim 
for the express purpose of saving men from trouble and 
calamities." Hearing this, Sun was both angry and 
glad, and could not help saying, "Friends, it is true you 
know that I am not Sun. I am onlj' his disciple come 
here to learn how to manage things. But is that not Sun 
coming?" pointing with his hand. At this all looked in 
the direction in which he pointed. 

During this interval, he changed from a Taoist 
and appeared in his true form. At this they all fell 
down and kowtowed, begging his pardon that their 
mortal eyes could not recognise him. "We implore 
you to enter the city, and compel the demons there 
to repent, and follow righteousness." Sun cried out, 
"Follow me," and they did, first to the sand, where 
they emptied two carts and smashed them into splinters, 
and then took the bricks and tiles and timber and threw 
them all into a heap calling upon all the priests to dis- 
perse. " To-morrow," said Sun, " I am going to see the 
King and I will destroy the TaoistsI They said, "Sir, 
we dare not go far, lest they attempt to seize you and there 



212 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

will be trouble." " Since you think so, I will give jou 
a charm for your protection." So saying the Great Holy 
One pulled out some hairs, and gave one to each to put on 
his nameless finger, and to hold firmly. "If any one 
attempt to catch you, hold fii-mly to this, call out * Great 
Holy One, the Equal of Heaven, ' and I will come and 
save you, though I should be ten thousand miles away." 
Some of them tried the charm and , sure enough, he stood 
before them like a god of Thunder. In his hand was an 
iron club so that an army of ten thousand men and hoi-ses 
could not get near him. After this about a hundred 
priests came up together and said, ' * There are a hundred 
Great Sages protecting us ! " They kowtowed to Sun and 
said, "It is perfectly marvellous how your magic 
works ! " 

What hapjiened after this j-ou shall hear in our 
next. 



CHAPTER XLV. 

BUDDHISTS AND TAOISTS COMPETE 

The Great Holy One becomes famous in the 
Taoist temple. 

Shows his skill in getting rain in the Slow 
<3arts' country. 

[outline.] 
( Slow Carts' Country. Part II. ) 

In this chapter, after some very coarse play, there 
is a contest between the Taoist and the Buddhist priests, 
as to which could obtain rain in answer to prayer, 
reminding one of the contest on Blount Carmel between 
Elijah and the priests of Baal. 

The Xing said, "The countrj' was suffei-ing from 
Irought, and although there are charges against you of 
murdering two priests, setting fi-ee five hundred slaves, 
^nd desecrating our temple, we will forgive you if you 
can bring rain. I will go to the top of the Five Phoenix 
Hall to watch you. First the Taoist will show his skill." 
The Taoist priest who was the Royal Wizard followed 
the King into the gallery while the blaster and his 
•disciples remained below. A messenger came running 
in to say that everything was ready for the altar. The 
Royal Wizard said, "When you hear my first signal, the 
wind will come, at my second signal, the clouds will 
come, at my third signal, thunder ond lightning will 
follow, at my foui-th signal, rain will come, at my fifth 
signal, the clouds and rain will cease." 



214 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

He mounted a platform about 30 feet high, alt 
round which were banners with illustrations of the 28 
Constellations. In the middle was a table, and on it was 
an incense burner and candles. Beside them was a 
golden tablet on which was written, ' God of Thunder.' 
Below these were five big jars full of clean water. 
Floating on the water were willow branches on which 
was an iron tablet whereon was written, ' The Charm 
of the Master of the Thunder Hall. ' On the right and 
left were five boards on which were written the names 
of the servants of the "Wind and Thunder. Beside each 
board there stood two Taoist priests each holding an 
iron banner. Behind them there were a great many 
Taoist writers of despatches and charms. 

A small Taoist presented the great Wizard with a 
book of charms written on yellow paper and with a 
precious sword. The Wizard pronounced an incantation, 
took a charm, burnt it in a candle and took a despatch 
and burnt it, and then he tapped the table as the first 
signal. Truly enough, at once it began to blow. Sun, 
at this, whispered to his companions, "Do not speak to 
me for some time, as I am going to attend to some 
private business." The Great Holy One then plucked a 
hair and changed it into his own form to remain there by 
his Master, while he himself mounted the clouds and 
shouted out, "Mistress of the wind, what are you doing ? 
Instead of helping me, who am going to fetch the 
Scriptures from the "West, you are helping a Demon! 
Bid the wind to cease or I will give you twenty blows 
with my steel staff ! ' ' The Wind goddess at once bade 
the wind to cease. 



BUDDHISTS AND TAOISTS COMPETE 215 

The Wizard now struck the table as his second 
signal and the clouds gathered all over the heavens. 
At the sight of this, Sun shouted out, "Who is in 
charge of the clouds?" A young man came forward and 
bowed, and Sun threatened him with twenty blows if 
he did not disperse the clouds at once. Immediately 
after this, the sun shone forth brightly and there was 
not a cloud in the sky for ten thousand li. 

At this, the Wizard cut loose his hair vdth. the 
sword, recited an incantation and burnt another charm. 
Then he struck the table as his third, signal. At this, 
from the south gate of heaven there appeared Teng Tien 
leading the Thunder god and the Lightning goddess 
before Sun and bowed to him. Sun reprimanded them, 
as he had done the others, for helping the Demons 
so earnestly instead of helping him. They replied that 
the charms and despatches had been burnt, and sent to 
the Celestial Ruler by the Wizard, and the Edict they 
had received was a genuine one to help in thunder, 
lightning and rain. Sun said, "Since it is so, wait here 
and serve me now." There was no thunder and no 
lightning after this. 

This made the Wizard still more anxious, and he 
burnt more incense and charms and recited more in- 
cantations and stnick the table as his foxirth signal. 
Instantly the dragons from the four oceans appeared. 

Sun cried out above their heads, "Ao Kwang, 
■where aje j'ou going?" (chap. 3, p. 18. ) Ao Kwang and 
his companion came forward and bowed. Then Sun told 
them what he had told the other helpers before, and 
added, "You helped me before though not successfully. 



216 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

To-day I hope you will help me with success." The 
Dragon King replied, "I gladly obey your oi-ders." Sun 
thanked him for following the Truth in the service 
rendered by his son in saving the Master. The Dragon 
replied, "That was in the sea where there was not much 
opportunity." Sun said, "As to the past, do as you 
think best, but to-day I beg of you to give me a helping 
hand. The Wizard's signal of fourth performance is now 
finished. It is now my turn, and I expect you all to 
help me. I burn no incense and have no signal but my 
club. When I lift up my spear the first time, I want the 
wind to blow." The mistress of the wind said, "The 
wind shall blow." 

"When I lift up my spear the second time, I want 
the clouds to gather." The young man in charge of 
the clouds said, "The clouds shall gather." 

"When T lift up my spear the third time, I want 
thunder and lightning." The Master and Mistress of 
thunder and lightning said, "We will serve." 

"When I lift up my spear the fourth time, I want 
rain." The Dragon replied, "Your orders shall be 
obeyed. " 

"When I lift up my spear the fifth time, I want a 
clear sky without fail." Having arranged this, he 
restored the false Sun and took his place. He shouted 
out, "Master Wizard, your fourth signal for performance 
is now over and there has been neither wind, clouds, 
thunder, lightning nor rain. Now it is my time to try." 

The Wizard came down from his platform altar and 
went to the gallery by the King, and the Monkey followed 
him. The King asked the Wizard how it was that none of 



BUDDHISTS AND TAOISTS COMPETE 217 

his four attempts were successful. The Wizard replied, 
"The rain-king was not at home to-day." The Monkey 
Angrily replied, " The dragon-gods were all at home, but 
your Royal Wizard is not sufficiently skilful." The King 
then ordered the Buddhist priest to mount the platform. 
Sun invited the Master to go, but he said he could 
not command rain. The Monkey said, " You can praji^, 
And I will do the rest." 

The Master therefore mounted the platform and 
reverently prayed the Heart Prayer. The Monkey quickly 
took out his spear from his ear and raised the point of 
it to the sky. Immediately the sound of wind filled the 
place, not of ordinary wind, but of a great typhoon, and 
tiles were lifted off the roofs, and bricks rolled about, 
with gravel and stones. 

The Monkey raised the point of his spear a second 
time, and mist and clouds darkened all like night. 

The Monkey raised the point of his spear a thii'd 
time, and then thunder and lightning broke forth as if 
the earth and mountains were split asunder, and so 
terrified the people that every family in the city burnt 
incense and paper money to their gods. 

The Monkey raised the point of his spear the fourth 
time, and rain fell as if buckets were being emptied, and 
all the streets were running with rivers, so that the King 
cried out, "Enough, enough! " The Monkey raised his 
spear point a fifth time, and immediately the wind, the 
thunder and lightning and rain ceased, and the clouds 
■cleared away to the great joy of all. 



CHAPTER XLVI. 

PERSECUTION AND DELIVERANCE 

The heretics persecute the true faith. 
The Monkey shows his goodness and annihi- 
lates oppressors. 

[outline.] 
(Slow Carts' Country. Part III. ) 

A second contest took place as to who could sit 
longest without moving, when a bug and a centipede 
were used to compel motion. 

A third contest took place to discover what was ir) 

a closed chest, a peach kernel or a Taoist priest. After 

failing in each of these, the Taoists proposed three feats, 

first, to cut one's head off and put it on again, secondly', 

to cut out one's heart and put it back again without a 

scar, thirdly, to be cast into boiling oil and not suffer. 

Sun accepted the challenge, but when the Taoist priests 

tried their arts, they perished. 

What is the use of playing with unknown materials ? 
It is waste of labour, and small successes are of no value. 

Ho w they continued on their way you shall hear in 
our next. 



CHAPTER XLVII. 

SAVING A BOY AND GIRL 

The Master stopped by a great river at uight. 
The two disciples save doomed children. 

[outline.] 

(The Milky Way Peril. Part I.) 

The false teachers, the Tiger, the Deer and the 
Goat, were now exterminated. On leaving the city, Sun 
spoke to the King and people, " The three religions 
should be one. The Buddhists deserve respect, the 
Taoists deserve respect, and so also do the Confucianists, 
who train men's minds. If you protect these three re- 
ligions the nation will be permanently prosperous." 

The pilgrims then pursued their journey. Time 
flew and the autumn came. One evening the Master 
said, " Let us rest." They found themselves at the 
River of Heaven (The Milky Way) (Tung Tien Ho) , 800 
li wide, and seeing a village, sought for lodgings there. 
They found a family named Chen, from whom they learnt 
that the priests, in a monastery close by, demanded the 
sacrifice of a boy and girl every year, along with offerings 
of pigs and goats, to avert a great calamity. In the 
house there were two old men, father and son, one over 
sixty, the other over fifty, but though they were very 
wealthy, there were but one son and one daughter of eight 
and seven years of age respectively, to perpetuate the 
family. Now the order had come from the Demon King 



220 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

of the river that these two children were to be given 
in sacrifice on the morrow. The old men were broken- 
hearted at the cruelty and oppression of tlie Demon and 
the priests. Sun proposed that he, possessing seventy-two 
magic arts, and Pa Kiei, possessing thirty-six arts, should 
transform themselves into the shape of this boy and girl, 
and offer themselves for sacrifice. Tliey were carried 
to the temple and pi-esented there. 

How they defeated the Demon, you shall hear in 
our next. 



CHAPTER XLVIII. 

THROUGH SNOW AND ICE. 

The Demon brings on cold wind and snow. 
The pilgrims, bent on serving Buddha, tramp 
over the ice. 

[outline.] 
(The. Milky Way Peril. Part II.) 

After the people had made their oflferings and dis- 
persed to their homes the Demon King came to eat the 
sacrifice. Pa Kiel and Sun then resumed their true 
forms and attacked him. After they had fought, Sun 
told him who they were, and demanded that he should 
restore to. life all the children sacrificed to him in pre- 
vious years. But the Demon escaped into the Milkj' 
Way River, where he planned with his family how to 
revenge himself. A witch suggested that the Demon 
should command a cold wind and snow to come, so that 
the river should be frozen, and that then, while the 
pilgrims were crossing, it would be easy to make the ice 
break. The Demon was greatly pleased and commanded 
the snow to fall. 

Meanwhile Pa Kiel and Sun took all the offerings 
from the temple to the Chen family, and told their hosts 
and the Master what had taken place. Next morning, 
they awoke to find the land covered with deep snow. 
The hosts begged the pilgrims to wait till the weather 
was warmer, but the Master resolved to proceed. Pa 



222 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Kiel went on ahead to test the ice, and found it was 
quite solid. So tliey pai"ted from their kind hosts, and 
the Master rode over the ice. Suddenly they heard a. 
rumbling noise below and the white horse fell. Now the 
Demon had been waiting for tlie sound of the horse's 
feet to make the ice give way. He seized on the Master 
and dragged him beneath, calling out, " C!ome, all of 
you ! We will feast on his flesh so that we may become 
immortal!" But the witch, afraid of Sun's revenge, 
persuaded the Demon to wait for two daj's, and they hid 
the Master in a stone coflfer. 

In the meantime, the disciples thought the Master 
was drowned. They went back to the Chen familj' with 
the sad ncM's. The old men wept bitterlj', but Sun said, 
" I am sure my Master is not drowned. This must be a 
trick on the part of the Demon. Give us some food, and 
we will go in search of the Master." Then they all took 
their weapons and Avent into the river to find the Demon. 

How the Master was rescued you shall hear in the 
next chapter. 



CHAPTER XLIX. 
SAVED BY A TORTOISE 
The Master falls into the water. 
Kwauyiu by a bamboo basket saves him. 

[outline.] 
(The Milky Way Peril. Part III.) 

Sun, Pa Kiel, and Sa Seng dived all three into the 
river and travelled about a hundred li until thej' found 
the Master imprisoned by the Demon King, who had 
been attacked at the temple. There ensued a fight, but 
Pa Kiel and Sa Seng alone could not conquer him. 

Sun, in despair went in search of Ivwanyin. She 
gave hini a bamboo basket, saying that he had only to 
show it to the old Tortoise who was in charge of the River 
and he would liberate the Master and ferry them over the 
river. The old Tortoise gladly did so, sajdng, " I have 
heard that the Head of Buddhism in Paradise is without 
Beginning or End and knows the Past and the Future. 
I have served him here for 1,300 years, I have lived 
long and my body has become light, and 1 can speak the 
language of man. I wish to get rid of this shell on my 
back. Please speak for me. That is all the reward I 
ask for this little service." (See chap. 99.) 

Thus the pilgrims passed on to the West. 

What happened to them afterwards you shall hear 
later. 



CHAPTER L. 

SAFE INSIDE THE MAGIC RING 

The flesh and spirit fight owing to desire. 
"When the spirit is weak the devil takes ad- 
vantage- 

[outline.] 

(The Dangera of leaving the Magic Circle. Part I.) 

It was now winter, and the pilgrims were climbing 
a high mountain by a narrow pass, and the Master was 
afraid of wild beasts. The three disciples bade him not 
be afraid as they were all vmitcd, and were all good men 
seeking truth. Being cold and hungry they greatly 
rejoiced to see a fine building ahead of them, but Sun 
said, " It is another Devil's trap. I Avill make a ring 
round you. Inside that you will be safe. Do not wander 
outside it. I will go and look for food.' ' By magic and 
skill Sun got his bowl full of rice, and returned to the 
Master. But the Master and his disciples had become 
tired of waiting inside the ring, and had gone West as 
far as the fine building. Pa Kiel went in to look. Not 
a soul was to be seen , but when he entered one of the 
back rooms upstaire, he was terrified out of his wits, for 
there was a white human skeleton of immense size lying 
there. He Avas about to flee when he saw three wadded 
waistcoats which he took to keep the pilgrims warm. The 
Master upbraided Pa Kiei, and would have had him restore 
them at once. By this time, however, the Demon of the 



SAFE INSIDE THE MAGIC RING 225 

house descended on them, bound the Master and said, 

" We have heard that if we eat a bit of your flesh our 

white hairs shall become black again, and our lost teeth 

spring up afresh." So he gave orders to the small 

devils to bind the three. This thej' did, and thrust the 

pilgrims into a cave, and laj' in wait for Sun. When he 

returned, there was a great fight. Sun by magic called 

forth a hundred thousand snakes which so frightened 

the small devils that thej' all ran to their cave. But 

they succeeded in robbing Sun of his magic club. 

When your virtue has grown one foot, the devil's tares have grown 

ten feet. 
What a pity the soul often has no steady purpose, 
But is led astray by circumstances. 

How this matter ended, you shall hear in our next. 



CHAPTER LI. 

HELPLESS WITHOUT THE MAGIC SPEAR 

The unregenerate heart uses a thousand 
schemes in vain. 

Endless struggles without merit in them can- 
not drive away the deviL 

[outline.] 
(The Dangers of leaving the Magic Circle. Part II) . 
The Great Holy One, emptj^-handed, having lost the 
battle, cried bitterly, and called out, " Master, I had 
hoped to bear testimony mth you, and practise religion 
with you till I was saved by the same Providence, and 
had the same magic power, little thinking that I should 
now be helpless without my weapons to do good." He 
then went up to heaven to ask for aid, and obtained the 
help of ceiiain Taoist divinities. Finally, however, he 
was cast on his own resources. He regained some of 
the stolen weapons and thus obtained their use again. 

The devil became conceited and did not take care. 
The magic club fell into the liands of the owner again. 

How things fared afterwards you shall hear in our 
next. 



CHAPTER LII. 

SEEKS HELP FROM JULAI 

Sun sets fire to the Demon's Cave. 

The Incarnate Model comes to the rescue. 

[outline. J 

(The Dangers of leaving the Magic Circle. Part III. ) 

At night Sun, by various magic arts, entered the 
Demon's cave and tried to take possession of a magic 
coil belonging to him. But failing in this, he called 
forth a number of small monkeys, who took away most of 
the Demon's weapons and set fire to the cave. Half of 
the small demons were burnt. But the Demon, by 
means of his magic coil, put out the fire and Sun was 
not able to rescue the Master and his fellow-pilgrims, 
who still remained bound. In the morning the Demon 
again fought against Sun and his Taoist allies, and with 
the aid of his magic coil, recaptured all his stolen 
weapons, so that thej'^ were helpless. 

Sun then went to the Spiritual Mountain and 
besought Julai for aid. Eighteen lohans were sent back 
with him to help him against the Demon. When Sun 
once more attacked him, the lohans threw diamond dust 
into the air, which blinded and half-buried the Demon. 
But, throwing his magic coil, he was able to gather up 
all the diamond dust and carry it back to his cave. 

The lohans then advised Sun to see the Ancient of 
Days, who knew more about the Demon than any one 



228 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

else. So Sun, mounting to the thirty-third Heaven, 
■went to the Palace of the Ancient of Days, where he 
found that the Demon -was none other than one of the 
deity's ox-angels who had stolen the magic coil from the 
Palace and had gone down to earth. It was the same 
coil with which Sun himself had been subdued, when 
he had rebelled against Heaven. 

The Ancient of Days mounted a cloud and reached 
the cave with Sun. He called upon the Demon to come 
forth. "When the Demon saw who it was, he was 
terrified. The Ancient of Days recited an incantation, 
and the Demon yielded up the magic coil to him . At a 
second incantation, all his strength left him and he 
appeared as a bull, and was led away bj' a ring in his 
nose. All the little demons were destroyed. The 
Master and the pilgrims were then liberated and set on 
their way. 

Before long they heard a man cry out, ' ' Holy 
priest, stop and take some food before you go." The 
Master wondered who this was. You shall hear in our 
next. 



CHAPTER LIII. 

MOTHER AND CHILD RIVER 

The Master drinks and becomes possessed \7ith 
a Demon spirit. 

A midwife washes away the evil spirit. 

[outline. J 
(The Dangers of leaving the Magic Circle. Part IV. ) 

They saw one of the angels that had helped to 
subjugate the Demon. He held in his hand a golden 
bowl of rice, saying, " Holy Priest, this bowl of rice was 
collected by Sun when he left you within the Magic 
Circle. Because you would not wait for him, you fell 
into the Demon's hands. Take it now and eat! " Thus 
was the bowl of food at last delivered to the Master. He 
was deeply grateful for his disciple's efforts. Sun 
replied, " All this trouble happened because you went 
outside the Circle I drew round you, but j^ou thought 
you would be safe in other folds. It is all owing to 
your foolishness, Pa Kiel ! Fortunately, Julai and the 
Ancient of Days put an end to the trouble and saved us." 

Then the four started on the Westward road again. 
It was now spring time. Soon they came to the country 
of the Amazons, where there was a river called the 
Mother and Child River, which made any who drank of 
it pregnant. 

This chapter is not suitable for translation inix) 
English. 



230 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

The ox-headed Demon attacked the pilgrims again, 

but was conquered by Sun, who saved his master and Pa 

Kiei from terrible pain. They all left the village and 

went on their way. The jjoem says: — 

Wash your mouth clean, 
Then your whole body is clean. 

Where they arrived after this you will hear in our 
next. 



CHAPTER LIV. 

THE COUNTRY OF THE AMAZONS 

The Pilgrims enter the country of Amazons. 
They skilfully escape being taken in the 
tempter's net. 

[outline.] 

The Queen of the Amazons desired the Master to 
marry her and remain as King of the country. Sun, 
not wishing to offend her, agreed to certain arrange- 
ments but stipulated that his passport be sealed, and the 
disciples should be allowed to leave to fetch the 
Scriptures at once. The Master went out of the city to 
bid farewell to his disciples. The Queen took the 
Master in the carriage with her. But when the disciples 
took leave, the Master begged the Queen to excuse him, 
as he intended leaving with them. Seeing she was very 
unwilling, Pa Kiel and Sa Seng told her that 
Priests did not marry, and at last spoke rudely to her. 
Then a powerful whirlwind arose and the Queen and the 
Master were spirited away. It was a case 

Of escaping from the tempter's net. 

And being carried away by a pleasure demon. 

Whether the Queen was a demon or not, and 
whether the Master's life was safe or not, you will know 
in our next. 



CHAPTER LV. 

SHE-DEVIL'S SCORPION STING 

Beauty and pleasure allure the Master. 
The heart, being right, is saved. 

[outline. J 

In the whirlwind there came a she-devil who carried 

the Master away to the Pipa cave. Sun and Pa Kiel 

followed, but she drove them back by her sting, as 

fearful as that of a scorpion. Kwanyin then came to 

their rescue and said, " Get the morning-star cock to 

come, and he will eat up the scorpion devil and deliver 

your Master." The star came, the she-devil was killed, 

and the Master was delivered. Then the pilgrims went 

on their westward way. Truly, 

Cut off your loves and be unaffected by them, 

Let that tide dry up, and thhik of tlie reUgious life. 

How they fared on their journey you shall hear 
below. 



CHAPTER LVI. 

WITHOUT PRINCIPLE, MAN IS MAD 

Sun, xaad -with passion, kills several robbers. 
"When there is no principle the mind gets wild. 

[outline. ] 

On their way the pilgrims, met a band of robbers, 
but Sun killed two of them. At night they lodged in 
the house of the father of the robber chieftain. The 
father and mother treated the pilgrims kindlj', and gave 
them food and lodging. At midnight the gang of 
robbers, led by the son, returned to the house and 
discussed how they should take their revenge on the 
pilgrims. The father, overhearing their talk, secretly 
advised the pilgrims to depart early, which thej' did. 
But Sun was angry with the wicked son and killed him. 
At this the Master was very angry. "Being a follower 
of my religion, how is it that you kill people? Yesterday 
you killed two, and to-day you have killed the son of our 
kind host. Being a bloody man you must leave me, I 
cannot keep you any longer." Alas, how true it is that 
when the heart is mad with passion the great treasure 
cannot be procured. 

When one's mind is not clear, it is difficult to 
succeed. 

Where the Great Holy One went after this, you 
shall hear in our next. 



CHAPTER LVII. 

THE TRUE AND FALSE MONKEYS 

The true Monkey tells of Ms troubles at Lo 
Kia Shan. 

The false Monkey boasts of his deeds at the 
Waterfall Cave. 

[outline. J 

Suu, after being banished by the Master as un- 
worthy to be his disciple, was in great distress. He was 
unwilling to return to his Waterfall Cave, for he would 
appear disgraced. He therefore decided not to return to 
his cave, but to go to Kwanyin in the Southern Ocean. 
After mounting the clouds, he soon arrived and was 
admitted to her presence. He prostrated himself before 
her and shed bitter tears. Kwanyin said, " What is the 
matter ? " Sun replied, "Ever since you delivered me 
from the punishment of Heaven, and bade me go with 
the Buddhist Ambassador to fetch the sacred books from 
the West, I have served him most faithfully and have 
risked my life manya time in saving his. But now, 
because I killed a few robbers who would, but for me, 
have killed him, he is most ungrateful, and sends me 
away in disgrace. Therefore I have come to you to do 
me justice. " Kwanyin said, " The robbers were human 
beings, and therefore you should not have killed them, 
even to save your Master. You should practise kindness 
as well as preach it, or your religion is no good. ' ' At this 
the Monke}^ confessed his sin, but added "I have rendered 



THE TRUE AND FALSE MONKEYS 235 

some service, and this should not be forgotten before 
sending me away in disgrace. I beg of you to pity me. 
I return to you the magic cap of spikes with which I am 
so often punished, and now let me return to my old home 
in the Waterfall Cave." Kwanyin replied, " The magic 
cap was given me by the Incarnate One (Juki) him- 
self." Then said the Monkey, "Let me go and return it 
to him." Kwanyin said, " No, wait until I see j-our 
Master. He will soon be in danger again and will need 
your help." 

Meanwhile, after Sun had been sent awaj', the 
Master on his horse travelled on his way a whole day with- 
out anything to eat. Then he got hungry. Pa Iviei 
asked him to dismount and rest, while he would see if 
there were any habitations near, where he could beg food. 
The Master then suffered from thirst and Sa Seng 
went away in search of some water, leaving the Master, 
the horse and baggage by the side of the road. Hunger 
and thirst seemed hard to bear, for the disciples were 
long gone away. 

Suddenly there was a stir in the sky, and he saw 
what seemed like Sun appear with a cup of water for the 
Master. But seeing it was Sun who brought it, the 
Master would not touch it. He would rather die of 
hunger and thirst than touch anything given him by 
the cruel Sun. The Monkey said, "If you die, what will 
become of j'^our great Mission to fetch the Sacred Books?" 
"What is that to you ? Go away, go away, do not come 
and trouble me any more." Now this was a Demon 
personating Sun. He got very angry and struck the 
the Master with his club, so that he fell fainting in the 



236 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

dust on the road. Then the false Sun went away, carrying 
the hlack felt bag, which contained the despatches and 
passports from the Emperor of China and the other 
rulers through whose regions they had passed. 

During this interval Pa Kiei had found a house, 
where an old woman had given him some food. This he 
carried back to the Master, after which he took him and 
Sa Seng to the old woman's house, for a night's lodging. 
Sa Seng was sent in search of the felt bag and documents 
and was told if he could not find them, to go on the 
clouds to Kwanyin to ask her help. 

When the mind wanders from the body, 

The form is without life, and there is no Divinity, 

When the passions are rebellious 

You must wait till they submit. 

After three daj's and three nights, Sa Seng arrived 
at the Waterfall Cave, where he found the false Sun 
seated on a rock, reading aloud the Imperial despatch 
spread out before him, in which it was written how the 
Emperor had died and had descended into Hades, but 
that the authorities there had allowed him to return to 
earth again, and he had made a vow to save the souls 
of the lost in Hades. Kwanyin had also graciouslj'- 
said that there was a God and a Scripture in the West 
which could save the dead spirits from torment. 'I 
have therefore commanded Huen Chwang (the awe- 
inspiring), whose surname is Chen, but whose common 
name is "Three Treasures" (Holy Scriptures, Institutes 
and Discourses), to travel far to the West in search of 
these wonderful Scriptures so as to have them made 
known in the East. Let none of the rulers, through 



THE TEUE AND FALSE MONKEYS 237 

whose lands he must pass, hinder him in this good work 
of Divine Providence.' 

This was dated the 13th j-ear of Ching KAvan and 
was stamped by the Emperor's seal in nine places. 
The messenger was to be accompanied by the chief 
disciple, the Truth Seeker (Wu Kung), the Strength 
Seeker (Chu AVu Neng) , and the Seeker after Purity (Sa 
Wu Ching) . 

On hearing this Sa Seng could not wait any longer, 
but cried out, " Brother Sun, the Master has lost his 
felt bag and the Emperor's despatch, and now I see you 
have them. Do not heed the Master's behaviour towards 
j'ou. Come back and let us continue our journey for 
the Holy Scriptures. But if you are unwilling to return, 
I beg of you a thousand times to let me have the bag 
with the Emperor's despatch." 

The false Sun laughed coldly and said, " Having 
read the despatch, I will myself go to the West for the 
Scriptures and acquire merit and make a name that shall 
never be forgotten." Sa Seng replied, " That is impos- 
sible ! It was never said that Sun waa to procure the 
Scriptures. If the Master does not go with j'ou, Buddha 
will not give you the Scriptures." The impostor an- 
swered, " But I have provided myself with a Master." 

So saying, he gave an order to one of the monkeys, 
who led out of the cave the white horse and the Master, 
followed by Pa Kiel with the baggage, and Sa Seng with 
his staff. When Sa Seng saw the procession, he was 
filled with wrath and cried out, " How comes it that 
there is another Sa Wu Ching?" And he struck at the 
false Sa Seng with his staff and killed him. 



238 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Then the false Sun brandished his magic club, and 
led out all the monkeys against Sa Seng, but he escaped 
and fled to the Southern Ocean to seek help from 
Kwanyin. There he found the true Sun with her, and, 
thinking it was the impostor arrived there before him to 
tell a lying tale to Kwanyin, he struck at him with the 
staff and cursed him. Kwanjdn told him to be calm 
and relate what had happened. Then after hearing 
his tale, she said, "Sun Wu Kung has been here for 
four days. It cannot be he that has created an impostor 
Master to fetch the Sacred Scriptures." Then Sa Seng 
proposed that Sun should go with him to the Waterfall 
Cave and see the demon impostor for himself. 

Deciding between good and enl at the AVaterfall Cave, 
Between true and false at the Mountain Orchard. 

How the true Sun was distinguished from the false 
one, you will hear in our next. 



CHAPTER LVIII. 
JULAI DECIDES WHICH IS TRUE 

A double mind upsets the order of Heaven 
and Earth. 

True Rest is not easily found in one's own soul. 

[OUTLDTE.J 

When Sun and Sa Seng arrived at the Waterfall 
Cave, they found the impostor sitting on the stone 
terrace drinking wine. Then Sun's anger was kindled 
and he went forward and cursed the Demon who was 
personating him, and taking possession of his home. 
They engaged in combat. Sa Seng mshed greatly to 
help, but was much perplexed : the two were so much 
alike that he feared he might aid the false one. So he 
went into the cave in search of the Master's bag with 
the Imperial despatch. But he could not find it. 

When he came out, the two were still fighting. 
Thej^ both cried out to him to return to the Master, and 
tell him all that had taken place. Sa Seng was still 
more perplexed, as their words were the same, and their 
appearance identical. Mounting on the clouds, he 
returned to the Master. 

The two Suns, still fighting, made their way to the 
Southern Ocean. Kwanyinand her attendants came forth 
to see them. Both of them cried out to her, " This 
monkey has taken mj"^ shape, and we have been fighting 
all the way from the Waterfall Cave. I have sent Sa 
Seng back to the Master, and have come to beg you to 



240 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

help me." Kwanyin and her fairies looked from one 
to the other, but could not detect any difference between 
them. She bade them cease from fighting, and she again 
scrutinized them. Then she called for Mu-to and the 
Eed Child, Steward, to come forth, and said to them, " I 
am going to pronounce a certain incantation and you 
must watch carefully and note which of them complains 
of pain in the head." So she recited the incantation to 
cause the spikes of Sun's hat to enter his head, but both 
of them cried out to her to cease, for the spikes were 
piercing their heads. 

Finally they went up to heaven so that the Supreme 
Being there should decide. The true Sun made his 
complaint that he was escorting the Royal messenger 
from China to fetch Holy Scriptures from the West, but 
that he was attacked on the waj', and that the Roj^al 
despatch had been stolen, and carried to his old home 
the Waterfall Cave, by the false Sun, who had appro- 
priated everything there. The false Sun asserted exactly 
the same thing, and the Supreme Ruler also could not 
decide which was the true being. 

Then all decided to go and see the Master on the 
road, and let him decide which was which. On being 
confronted with them, the Master realised that the one 
who had robbed and beaten him must have been a false 
Demon. But the two were so exactly alike, and each 
asserted the same of the other, that even the Master could 
not decide between them. 

Then they decided to go to Hades and search the 
records there. But it was equally in vain , as no monkey 
name had been preserved there since the Monkey King 



JULAI DECIDES WHICH IS TRUE 241 

had visited them and confused their records. Therefore 
none there could decide. However, before leaving, one 
of the Ministers of Hades said, " We know the names 
of all the demons, but must not disclose them in their 
presence, lest a riot should arise below. We dare not 
help the true one, for the magic powers of the false one 
are exactly equal to the true, and therefore the true is 
unable to arrest the false." Ti Tsang Pusa therefore 
said to them both, " Since you are identical in form and 
appearance, and have exactly the same magic powers, I 
advise you to go to Shakyamuni and let hun decide for 
you." Thus the gates of Hades were opened, and the 
two eagerly went to see Shakyamuni. 
The poem says: — 

A double-minded man gets into trouble, 

On land and sea he is in the midst of doubt, 

Trusting in his fine horse and three faithful servants, 

Relying on magic spears and highest service. 

In North and South without success, 

In East and West troubles rise. 

Ser\'ing God you must sacrifice your own will. 

Then there is new birth and growth into a saint. 

The two Suns pressed and fought on, till they came 
to the Assembly of the Saints, where were the four great 
Buddhisatvas, the eight great Cherubim, the 500 Lohans, 
the 8,000 choristers and innumerable saints, men and 
women, whom the Incarnate Model taught of the tran- 
scendental mysteries of Universal Law. They were as 

follows: — 

1. That which exists in Emptiness. ^ ?§■ «|> ^. 

2. The Emptiness that is in Fulness. ^ IS «t» ^. 

3. The Form which has no Form. ^ ■6, *}> ■£. 

4. That which is real in Emptiness. ^ 3? «f ^- 



242 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

5. That which is not apparent is the real. ^^^^. 

6. That which is not apparent is not really non-existent. 

7. It is not Form which is apparent Form. ^ •£ i^ 'fi. 

8. It is not Emptiness which is apparent Emptiness. 

db ^ ■«> (Aa 

9. Emptiness is real Emptiness. ^ 6P J^ ^- 

10. Form is real Form. ■& IP :^ ■&. 

11. True Form is not permanent. €1 Sf ^ ■£,. 

12. Form is empty. 6 IP ;i ^. 

13. Emptiness is not real Emptiness. ^ SS j£ oc- 

14. The empty Form is the true Form. S IP jS •fe- 

15. Apparent Emptiness is not real Emptiness jua^"^^. 

16. Apparent Foi-m is not real Form. ^ •& !^f« "fi. 

17. The name is only a ticket. ^ M M T- 

18. The comprehension of these Mysteries is the beginning 

of Wisdom. J& ^ ij! =S^. 

The Incarnate Model (Julai) said to the Assembly, 
" You are all of one mind. Now behold the double- 
minded come." The two Suns quarrelled fiercely, each 
claiming the same thing, and asked the Incarnate Model 
to decide. He said, " There are but five classes of 
Immortals in the Universe, viz., those of heaven, those 
of earth, those of gods, those of men, those of spirits. 

There are but five classes of creatures, viz., men, fish, 
hairy creatures, feathered creatures and worms. 

These two Suns do not belong to any of these ten 
classes, but to the four classes of monke}'s. 

1. The first is the clever stone monke}', that knows 
magic, knows the times and seasons, and knows the 
treasures of earth and sky. 

2. The second is a bare-tailed horse-monkey, that 
knows light and darkness and human affairs, is skilful 
ingoing in and out, and can avoid death and prolong life. 




The Tncaknate One, 
With the Dove settling down ou Him. 
The Dove shows that the original artist connected the Epic 
-with the Gospel Narrative. 



JULAI DECIDES WHICH IS TRUE 243 

3. The third is the sliding long-armed monkey, 
that holds the sun and moon in his hands, can com- 
press a thousand mountains, knows what is lucky and 
unlucky, and plays with heaven and earth, as if they 
were mere balls. 

4. The fourth is the six-eared monkey, that hears 
at great distances, understands the principles of things, 
knows the past and future, and all things are perfectly 
clear to him. 

The Incarnate Model said, "It is this six-eared 
monkey who is the false one." At this the false 
monkey was greatly alanned, transformed himself into 
a bee, and tried to fly away, but the Incarnate Model 
put a pot over it, which prevented its escape. The true 
Sun could not contain himself anj^ longer, and struck it 
dead with his club, and so ended this species of monkey, 
and none have appeared since. 

Meanwhile Pa Kiel had gone to the Mountain Cave 
and found the false Master and disciples whom he 
killed, having discovered they were only monkeys trans- 
formed. He then brought back the felt bag and stolen 
documents. Thus once more the four true pilgrims 
started on their westward journey. 

Discord on the way disturbs all'tliings. 
Demons talce advantage and unite in mischief. 
When one's soul is at rest, religion is well founded, 
The senses are clear, and life is assured. 

Where the Pilgrims arrived after this j^ou will hear 

in our next. 



CHAPTER LIX. 
A VOLCANO QUENCHED BY A FAN 

The Master hindered by the Flaming mountain. 
Sun shakes a magic fan. 

[outline.] 
(The Ox-headed Demon. Part I.) 

Ha-\ang thrown off their suspicions, the Master 
and Sun marched on together, but they began to feel 
the heat greatly, although it was autumn. They M'ere 
in the Sze Ha Li country, where everj'thing was red — 
red walls, red tiles, red varnish on doors and furniture. 
Sisty li from this was a place called Flaming Mountain, 
which lay on their waj' westwards. 

An old man there said it was only possible to cross 
the Flaming Mountain if they had a magic Iron Fan 
which at the first shake could quench fire, at the 
second shake could produce strong wind, and at the 
third shake produce rain. This magic fan was kept by 
a wizard (Shen) called the Iron Fan ^Mzard in a cave 
at Tsei Yun Shan, 1,500 li away. On hearing this. Sun 
mounted a cloud and was there in a moment. After 
arriving there, he found there was no Iron Fan AVizard, 
but an Iron Fan Princess, one of the Lochas (the wives 
and daughters of demons). She was the mother of the 
red Demon Child Avith whom Sun had fought (see Chaps. 
40, 41, 42) and who had become a disciple of Kwanyin. 
On hearing that Sun Wu Kung had called, she was very 
angry, and wanted to have her revenge for the outwit- 



A VOLCANO QUENCHED BY A FAN 245 

ting of her husband, the Ox-headed Demon (see pp. 199 — 
204 . . . . ) and for the taking awaj' of her son. He said , "If 
3^ou lend me the IronFanlwill bring your sonto see you." 
She did not believe him and struck him with a sword. 
He then fought her long, and she, feeling her strength 
failing, took out the Magic Fan and gave it a shake. 
With the wind it raised, Sun was blown aM'ay 84,000 
li and whirled about like a leaf in a whirlwind. But 
he soon returned with further magic powers from Ling 
Xi Pusa (one of the Buddhist saints) . But the Locha 
princess deceived him, and gave him a Fan, which 
increased the flames instead of lessening them. So Sun 
and his party had to retreat more than twenty li, or they 
would have been burnt bj' the flames of the mountain. 

Then the local mountain gods appeared, bringing 
them refreshments, and urging them to get the Magic 
Fan before they could proceed. Sun pointed to his Fan 
and said, "Is this not the Fan?" They smiled and 
said, "No, this is a false one which the Princess has 
given you." 

If you ^vtint the true Palm leaf fan. 

You must get it through the Ox King himself. 

If you wish to know about the Ox King, listen to 
the next chapter. 



CHAPTER LX. 

THE OX-HEADED DEMON 

The Ox-headed Demon King, after the battle 
goes to a banquet. 

The Practical Sun twice tests the Palm Fan. 

[outline, j 

(The Ox-headed Demon. Part 11.) 

The local gods said, " Originally there was no 
Flaming Mountain here, but when you upset the 
furnace in Heaven 500 years ago, the fire fell here, and 
has been burning ever since, and we have had to look 
after it as a punishment for not having taken more care 
in Heaven. The Ox-headed Demon King, though he 
married the Locha Princess, deserted her some two years 
ago for the only daughter of a Fox king. They live at 
Chih Lei Shan, some 3,000 li from here. If you can get 
the true Palm Fan through his help, you will be able to 
end the fire, take your Master to the West, save the lives 
of many beings around here, and enable us to return to 
Heaven once more." 

Having heard this. Sun mounted on a cloud and 
ari-ived at Chih Lei Shan. There he met the Fox Prin- 
cess whom he upbraided and pursued back to her cave. 
The Ox Demon came out and became verj- angry with Sun 
for having terrified her. Sun asked him to return to the 
Locha Princess with him and beg the Magic Fan of her. 
This the Ox Demon refused to do. Then they fought 
three times together, and Sun was victorious. With the 



THE OX-HEADED DEMON 247 

consent of the Ox Demon, he changed into his shape and 
visited the Locha Princess. She, thinking he was the Ox 
Demon, gladly received him back, and finally gave him 
the Magic Fan to keep. Having obtained this, he set 
out to his Master. 

To learn how he fared afterwards, you must listen to 
■what follows. 



CHAPTER LXI. 
THE MAGIC FAN TESTED 
Chu Pa Kiel helps to master the Demon king:. 
Sun thrice tests the Magic Pan. 

[OUTUXE.] 

(The Ox-headed Demon. Part III.) 
On the way back, the Ox Demon followed after Sun 
and saw him, joyfullj'' carrying the Magic Fan on his 
shoulder. Now Sun had forgotten to ask how to make it 
small, and like an apricot leaf, as it was at first. The Ox 
Demon, wishing to revenge himself on Sun, changed him- 
self into the likeness of Pa Kiel. He went up to Sun and 
said, " I am glad to see 3'ou come back, brother Sun, have 
you succeeded?" " Yes," replied Sun, and he described 
his fights, and how he had deceived the Ox- Demon King's 
wife into giving him the magic fan. The Ox-headed 
King, now personifj'ing Pa Kiel, said, "You must be 
very tired after all your efforts, let me carrj' the Magic 
fan for you." As soon as he got it into his hands, he 
appeared in his true form, cursed Sun with all the evil 
names he could think of, and they fought with all their 
might. The Ox-headed King wished to use the Magic 
Fan to blow Sun away 84,000 li, but did not know that 
the Great Holy One had swallowed the wind-resisting pill, 
and was therefore surprised to find him immoveable. He 
then put the Magic Fan in his mouth and fought with 
his two swords. He was a match for Sun in all his 
magic arts, but Sun, being helped by Pa Kiel and the 



t %-h ^ # 
i ^^ ^ ^t 










Sun puts out fiee by the Maoic Fax. 



THE MAGIC FAN TESTED 249 

local gods whom the Master had sent, proved himself 
stronger. The Demon changed himself many times 
into a number of birds, but for each of these Sun was 
able to change himself into a swifter and stronger one. 
Then the Demon changed himself into many beasts, such 
as tigers, leopards, bears, elephants and an ox 10,000 
feet long, then laughed and said to Sun, " What can you 
do to me now?" Sun took his steel club and cried out 
' ' Grow ! , " and suddenly he grew to be 100,000 feet high, 
with ej'^es like the sun and moon. They fought till the 
heavens and the earth shook with their onslaughts. 

When one's virtue is one foot high, the Demon's arts are ten 
thousand feet high in order to overcome virtue. 

If the flames of passions are to be put out, we must get the 
Magic Fan to cool our desires. 

When the will is not supreme, one must seek the help of the 
Supreme, 

The passions and the supreme will must reign (harmoni- 
ously), 

Then all classes of Society will be at peace. 

Devils are tamed, the unclean are purified, and all go to- 
gether towards Heaven. 

As this Ox-headed Demon was so terrible, both 
Buddha in Heaven and the Taoist Celestial Ruler sent 
down whole legions of celebrated warriors to help the 
Master's party. The Demon tried to escape by the 
North, by the South, by the East and by the West, but 
in all these efforts he was baffled. Being defeated, both 
he and his wife promised to give up their wicked ways 
and follow the Buddhist principles of kindness. 

The Magic Fan was given to Sun, who tested its 
magic. After the first shake, the flames of the mountain 
died out. After the second shake a cool gentle breeze 



250 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

arose. After the third, gentle rain fell everj-where, and 
the Pilgrims proceeded on their Journey in comfort. How 
true it is — 

AVhen the feelings are well regulated, the First Cause helps, 
Inward struggles of fire and water cease, and peace is 
attained. 

How long it took them to reach the Thunder Hall 
of Heaven you shall hear in what follows. 



CHAPTER LXII. 

THE NINE-HEADED DEMON 

In cleansing the heart, cleanse the citadel. 
To bind the devil, practise virtue. 

[outline.] 

(The Nine-headed Demon. Part I.) 

The Master and his disciples travelled on till tliej"- 
came to a city. On entering the city, they saw a 
number of priests, clad in rags and locked with hand- 
cufis. On enquiry they were told that the city was 
called Chill Sai Kwoh, and had formerly been the 
capital of a great country in the West. Four nations 
had paid tribute to it yearly, viz., To Kwoh, a country 
on the South, Kao Chang (Chinese Hsi Chow) on the 
north, the countr)"^ of Shi Liang on the East, and the 
country of Pen Po on the "West. These tributes were 
precious stones, beautiful women and fine horses. The 
country was at peace, and the surrounding nations had 
honoured it as chief amongst them. Then the Master 
said, " Your King and his ministers, civil and militar}'-, 
must all have been fine men." The priests replied, "On 
the contrary, all were bad. Our monaster}-, Kin Kwang 
Sze' (Golden Light Monastery), with its thirteen storied 
pagoda, which was once most beautiful, is now falling 
rapidly into ruins. Three years ago there fell a shower 
of blood, which made the whole temple stink, and nobody 
comes near it now. Its glory has departed." 

The Master determined he would cleanse the Pagoda 



252 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

himself that very night. Sun helped him, but the 
Master at the tenth story got tired. Sun said, ' 'Go to rest, 
I Avill clean the upper stories myself." When he reached 
the top story he found two devils feasting there. He 
at once attacked and arrested them. 

Next morning the Master asked to see the King to 
present his credentials. Then it was disclosed that the 
ruin of the monastery, of the priests, and of the capital was 
owing to the work of these devils. When examined by 
the blaster, thej' had confessed that three years before a 
Dragon King of ten thousand powers, ruling about four 
hundred li to the South-East of this countrv, in a 
mountain called the AA'ild Rock, had a lovely daughter, 
whom he gave in marriage to a nine-headed Demon of 
unparalleled magic power. These two, father and son- 
in-law, liad caused the shower of blood to fall, and then 
had stolen the gold off the cupola of the Pagoda, and the 
Shie li Eelics which now illuminated the Dragon 
Palace, so that the night had become like day. The 
daughter had also stolen the Immortal Plant ^ ^ (Ling 
Chih) from the Queen of Heaven . The two devils were not 
the chiefs of the Wild Rock, but were simply small 
officials sent to the Pagoda to look after things. 

The King asked that Sun should lead an army 
to put down these robbers. San and Pa Kiel, however, 
said thej' needed no army, but wished the two prisoners 
to act as their guides to the Wild Rock. 

When the Ministers of State saw these two disciples 
mount the cloud, thej' realized that the Master and his 
disciples were godlike men. 

But to hear how they succeeded, listen to our next. 



CHAPTER LXIII. 
RIGHTEOUSNESS ALONE BRINGS PROSPERITY 

The tTvo Pilgrims attack the Dragon Palace. 

The good drive away the had and recover the 
Magic Treasures. 

[outline.] 

(The Nine-headed Demon. Part II.) 

Sun and Pa Kiel went to the Dragon Palace and 
fought hard. Thej' obtained the assistance of seven 
brothers coming back from a hunt, to whom tliey toki 
their story. 

Finally the Dragon King and his nine-headed son- 
in-law were killed, and the Shie li Relics belonging to the 
top of the Pagoda, and the M. ^ Ling Chili, Plant of 
Immortalitj', were restored. The Temple name was 
changed from that of Golden Light Temple into that of 
Dragon-Conquered-Temple. The King gave a banquet 
to the pilgrims, and wished to present them with silver 
for their journey, but they would not receive any, and 
the partj- departed. Truly, — 

When evil spirits are driven away, everything is peaceful, 

Magic Treasures abound in the land. 

How the party fared on their further journey, you 
shall hear in the next chapter. 



CHAPTER LXIV. 
THORNS AND FAIRY LAND 

In the Thorny Pass the Strength-Seeker, Pa 
Kiel, strives hard. 

In the wooden Fairy Temple the Master talks 
poetry. 

[OUTLIXE.J 

The travellers now entered a forest of thorns, through 
which it would have been impossible to pass but for the 
labours of Pa Kiei in clearing a path. On the top of the 
pass they saw what appeared to be a temple, where the 
Master wished to rest for the night. But Sun said, "I fear 
that in this place, good fortune is small and the danger 
great." At this moment the Master saw, as in a dream, 
some old men appear, who said, "You had better stay 
here for the night, for there are 800 li of wilderness 
before you." A gust of wind seemed to separate the 
Master from his disciples. He fancied th^'t the three old 
men at the temple told him that they had' heard of his 
coming, and that they invited him to stay and match 
some verses of poetr}'^ with them. They were in reality 
idle spirits in league with fairies, trying to seduce him. 
The Master, when asked about his religion, answered and 
said, "Our religion is quiet, our laAv is to save. We save 
in silence (ascetic life) , but it cannot be done without 
understanding. To understand one must first be pure in 
heart and without anxiety, and be rid of evil habits. It 
is not easy to be born as man, or in the Middle Kingdom 




Pa Kiei clears the way thkouoh tfiokns. 



THORNS AND FAIRY LAND 255 

(China), and find the true religion. It is a great 
blessing to obtain all these three privileges, which few 
enjoy, by which one can avoid the mistakes of the 
senses and tradition. Wisdom is to know how to get rid 
of the necessity of rebiz-th, how to die without debt to 
anyone in the universe, to become beyond all form and 
no form, both human and divine, to seek truth and 
the origin of things, and link cause with effect, to 
understand the real miracle of Muni (the Enlightened) , 
to see the net which surrounds us, and to tread Nirvana 
(Nothingness of Primitive Buddhism) under our feet. 
For this, we must examine our understanding, and 
examine our comprehending, and get sure hold of that 
vital flame, which will illuminate the world, and reveal 
the spiritual world through all, in all its mystery and 
preserve it firmlj'. Who knows the passage from death 
to life? I strive to study the great depth of my religion. 
It is only those who have a Mali to follow it and who are 
called by Providence (Yeu Yen) the Elect, who can 
master it." After these words the spirits vanished and 
he regained his disciples. Soon there remained but a few 
trees instead of the structure the Master thought was a 
temple. The trees were the spirits transformed and Pa 
Kiel struck at them and blood flowed, which alarmed 
the Master. But his disciples urged him to mount 
his horse and start again on their way. 

How they got on after this, you shall hear later. 



CHAPTER LXV. 

A FALSE HEAVEN WHERE ALL SEEMS LOST 

Th.e evil spirits produce also a Thunder 
temple. 

The four pilgrims fall into terrible danger. 

[outline.] 
(Small Thunder Temple Demon. Part I.) 

The four travelled on over a hill and saw a temple, 
on which was written Lui Yin Sze (Thunder Temple), 
which the Master thought to be the home of a famous 
Buddhist Saint. " Kwanyin lives in the Southern Ocean, 
Pu Hien lives in Omei Mountain in Szechuan, Wen 
Shu Pusa in AVutai in Shansi, I do not know what famous 
saint lives here. Let us go in." But Sun said, " It is 
not called the Thunder Temple, but the Little Thunder 
Temple, I fear it is not safe to go in." But the Master 
insisted on going in. Sun said, " If you get into trouble, 
do not blame me. ' ' 

They went in. There was the image of Julai, with 
800 Lohans and angel followers, besides the four 
Cherubim, eight Boddhisatvas, and disciples innumer- 
able. These figures filled the Master, Pa Kiel and Sa 
S§ng with awe, and they knelt and worshipped at every 
step; but Sun paid no respect to any of them. Then a 
loud voice cried out, " How is it that Sun, the chief 
disciple, does not worship Buddha? ' ' At this Sun pluck- 
ed up his steel club, and cried, "How dare you, false 



A FALSE HEAVEN "WHERE ALL SEEMS LOST 257 

one, pretend to be the Buddha?" Suddenl}' Sun found 
himself imprisoned inside a metal sphere, where neither 
head nor hands were visible, while the Master was carried 
to one of the rooms behind. Sun became alarmed lest 
his Master should suffer harm. He applied his magic 
art to enlarge himself, but the metal sphere grewequallj- 
large. Then he tried to become as small as a mustard 
seed, in the hope of getting out through a small hole, but 
the metal sphere became equally small also. Then, by 
magic, he called the spirits from the four quarters to come 
to his help. But none could move, nor turn over the 
sphere. They then hurried up to heaven for help, and 
the angels of the twenty -eight Constellations were ordered 
to go and help. When they came, they bored, after in- 
finite labour, a tiny hole through Avhich Sun came out. 
Then with his steel club he smashed the sphere into 
atoms. This awoke the Thunder Demon, and he called 
all his followers to fight Sun and the angels of the 
Constellations. Thej' surrounded the Demon, but he 
seemed in no way alarmed. He took out a magic bag in 
which he caught Sun and all his allies and carried 
them away as prisoners. Then he bound them all one by 
one with ropes, to keep them secure for his banquet. 
About midnight Sun made himself so small that he 
slipped out of his ropes. After that he went round and, 
loosening each of his fellow prisoners, he led them out. 
Unfortunately the Demon again succeeded in putting 
the Master, Pa Kiel and Sa SSng, together with the 
heavenly host, into the bag. Sun wept at this, for he 
was loath to go again to heaven to ask the Celestial 
Sovereign for aid. Then he remembered that there was 



258 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

a military spirit of the Northern region called Chin Wu , 

and of him he decided to ask help. 

When the way of the saints is not complete 

The mind and heart are -without aim, ready to perish. 

What came of his request, you will hear in the 
next chapter. 



CHAPTER LXVI. 
MILEH FO COMES TO THE RESCUE 
All the gods fall into the Demon's hands. 
Mileh Fo (The Messiah) himself voluntarily 
binds the Devil. 

[OUTLINK.] 

(Small Thunder Temple Demon. Part II. ) 

Now Chin Wu (the True Conqueror) was the ruler 

of the Pure Land Country, and had an all-powerful 

Queen who, after swallowing a beam of light, had given 

birth to a son in A.D. 581.* 

Brave He was when young. 
Wise He was when grown, 
The throne He did not covet, 
Only virtue was His quest. 
Against His parents' wish. 
Palace joys He left, 
To study the Mysteries, 
In lonely hill retreats. 
When His work was finished, 
He ascended up in light, 
Eeceived the name of Conqueror, 
The Equal One with God. 
AH demon forms and spirits 
That caused man's sin and woe 
Were put in His controL 

Two generals, of the Tortoise and Serpent stars, and 

five Dragons were sent to help Sun against the Thunder 

* li the Nestoriaiis taught that the Spirit of their Saviour had reappeared in the 
person ol Olopen, the leader of the Nestorian Mission to Slanfu, tlien, since we 
know that the Mission arrived in A.D. 635 Olopen must have been, according 
to the author's reckoning, fifty-four years of age when he arrived in China.— 
Tr. 



260 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Demon . But after several fights they were captured by 
the Demon. Sun was greatlj' disheartened, but the local 
gods told him not to lose courage, but to ask AVu Tang 
of the Southern Continent for aid. This great Pusa was 
a chief of exceeding mighty power, ai:d had formerly 
subdued the Queen of the Ocean. After hearing Sun's 
tale, Wu Tang sent his son Chang and four of his 
generals to help him against the Demon. But after 
fighting a long time, the Demon captured them all in his 
Magic Bag, and, binding them, threw them into a 
vault. 

Then Sun went to the top of a hill near and wept in 
despair. In the midst of his grief, he saw a bright cloud 
approach from the Southwest and heard a voice calhng 
him. This was no other than MILEH FO (MESSIAH) , 
THE MOST HONOURED IN THE PARADISE OF 
THE WEST. 

Mileh then told Sun not to lose heart, but to attack 
the Demon once more. This time, however, he was to 
retreat before the Demon and lead him to a little temple 
at the foot of the hill, where there was a garden of melons 
belonging to Mileh Fo. Sim was then to transform 
himself into a fine ripe melon, and Mileh Fo would give 
him to the Demon to eat. Once inside his enemy, Sun 
could have his revenge. 

This plan greatly pleased Sun, and all was done as 
had been proposed. Mileh Fo, in the form of a 
gardener, gave the Demon a large ripe melon to quench 
his thirst. Directly Sun slipped down his throat, he 
caused such agony to the Demon that he rolled on the 
ground, and the tears ran down his cheeks. Then Mileh 



MILEH FO COMES TO THE EESCUE 261 

Fo made himself known to the Demon, who was greatly 
terrified, and begged his Master's forgiveness. Mileh Fo 
then bade Sun come forth, and taking the Demon's trea- 
sures from him he shut him up in the Magic Bag. 

Then they returned to the Thunder Temple. The 
little demons, seeing Mileh Fo, knew that their chief 
had been vanquished, and fled away in terror. But Sun 
pursued and killed them all. The Master and pilgrims 
were then discovered, and the heavenly allies were all 
liberated from the vault, and thanked for their assistance. 
Before the pilgrims resumed their journey, they set fire 
to the temple which had been used to deceive worshippers. 
Thus now. 

Without troubles or Demons they travelled to the West. 
Having passed through these trials of their Ufe. 

How they arrived at the Great Thunder Temple, 

you will learn later. 



CHAPTER LXVII. 

FINAL SAFETY OF CONVERTED SOULS 

The Pure Land village is saved. 
The soul is purified. 

[outline.] 

Now the four pilgrims gladly started again on their 
onward journey and travelled for a month. It was 
spring time, and flowers were opening all around them. 
An old man whom thej'' met said, "This is not the 
great Heaven of the West, which is far and difficult to 
reach. This place is only the little Heaven. You have 
seven stages more to do." 

This chapter describes a religious sect sunk in dirty, 
slimj^ snakj', underhand practices full of filth, which 
was finally cleansed by open-handed straightforward 
methods. 

Where the Pilgrims came after this, you will learn 
later. 



CHAPTER LXVIIl. 

SUN BECOMES A DOCTOR 

In the Vermillion Country the Master talks of 
his former life. 

Sun sho-ws his threefold life. 

[outline. ] 
(The King's Illness. Part I.) 

The Good get the help of ten thousand Providences. 

Their fame spreads to the four continents, 

Their wisdom shines on the life to come. 

They are blown about to the ends of heaven. 

All things serve them and they enjoy themselves for ever, 

They no longer believe in the dreams of earth. 

They have cleansed themselves from all the dust of time. 

Ha^^ng been cleansed from the filth of that sect, the 
pilgrims travelled ou. This chapter is full of strange 
incidents brought about by Sun. Having arrived in the 
Vermillion Country, the pilgrims presented the King 
with the Chinese Emperor's despatch, in which he 
described his experiences in Hades, how after three 
days he had been allowed to return to earth, and how, 
in cder to commemorate the event, he had sent the 
Master in search of the Scriptures, which could save those 
who were suffering in hell. 

Now the King of the Vermillion Country was 
himself ill, and had not been able to give audience for 
some time, therefore he was much interested in this 
story of the Emperor of China. He issued a proclamation 
that very day authorising any able doctors to come and 



264 illSSION TO HEAVEN 

prescribe for him, adding that the one Avho could cure 

him would be rewarded with a share in his kingdom. 

At the sight of this proclamation, Sun decided to have 

some fun out of it. He offered to cure the king. But 

when he appeared, the sight of his face, and the manner 

of his speech, so terrified the King that he fell into a 

swoon, and the attendants were afraid to let him see the 

King again. But Sun said that it was not at all necessary 

for him to see the King again. "If you tie a silk thread 

to his wrist, I can at the other end find out his disease 

and prescribe for him. ' ' 

When the heart has a secret to save a country, 
There is inwardly a magic that will make it live. 

If you wish to know what disease it was, read the 
next chapter. 



CHAPTER LXIX. 
FEELS THE PULSE BY A STRING 
Sun at night thinks of medicine. 

The King and officials at a banquet discuss 
the Pilgrims. 

[outline.] 
(The King's lUness. Part II.) 

Then comes the description of the extraordinary 
way in which the pulse was felt bj' means of a string 
attached to the King's palm, and the disease diagnosed 
by the doctor at a distance. 

After this is a description of the pharmacopoeia of 
880 diflferent medicines to heal 440 different diseases. 

The King admitted that his illness was a grief for 

the loss of his wife, whom an evil spirit had carried away. 

The Monkey at once mounted the clouds to find and 

attack the evil spirit.' 

To pacify a nation, first attend to the King's illness. 

To obtain true religion, one must put away the love of evil. 

What happened after his disappearance in the 
clouds you shall read in the next. chapter. 



CHAPTER LXX. 

THREE PLAGUES 

The evil spirit's art produces smoke and fire 
and sand. 

The Monkey's art takes away the golden bells. 

[ouTLrsrE.J 

(The King's lUness. Part III.) 

Sun, accompanied by the King, went forth in search 
of the evil spirit who had imprisoned the King's wife. 
They found he possessed three great bells, the first of which, 
on being shaken, could produce smoke, the second of 
which could produce fire, and the third such a thick sand 
storm that the sun could not be seen. Now at first there 
appeared great smoke and fire. The Monkey, not 
knowing what it meant, changed himself into a fire 
cricket that the fire might do him no harm. He further 
took a cup of wine, which the Demon was offering him, 
and threw its contents into the air. Soon there came a 
messenger who related that, when the fire was burning 
fiercely, a shower of rain, which had the smell of wine, fell 
and had extinguished the fire. 

The Demon then said, "Excuse me, Divine pilgrim, 
asking you a question. Your face looks like a monkey. 
How is it that you know all these wonderful arts, and 
can travel enormous distance in no time ?" 

The Monkey answered and said, "Although my face 
has been like that of a monkey from my childhood, I 
have studied the waj' of life and death, and have every- 



THREE PLAGUES 267 

where sought a competent teacher to give me the right 
teaching. I have retired to the mountains and studied 
night and day, and relied on Heaven for eternal princi- 
ples, and on earth for my laboratory for experiments. I 
have combined two elements to produce a new one, I have 
mixed positive and negative properties as different as 
fire and water, and in time have discovered Nature's 
secret that all depends on experiments, and on trials, 
under different conditions. Experiments with different 
elements are easy, and a little addition of one or of the 
other produces all Nature's combinations, according to 
the definite proportions of the various forces. When the 
positive and negative follow their respective laws, and 
the three forces (Mind, Matter and Life) unite to form 
the golden Pill of Immortality, then we can understand 
the laws which permeate all things. The fundamental 
laws are like the aiding forces of God passing between 
heaven and earth without interruption, traversing 18,000 
li in one flash." (The speed of electricity anticipated. 
-Tr.) 

By trying to be wise, one becomes foolish, 

By playing with a vice, it becomes a bad habit. 

How Sun outwitted the evil spirit, and took 
possession of the three plague bells by the help of the 
King and Queen, you will hear in our next chapter. 



CHAPTER LXXI. 
THE THREE BELLS 

Sun under a false name subdues an evil spirit. 

Kwanyin appears and subdues the chief of 
devils. 

[outline.] 
(The King's Illness. Part IV. ) 

Sun now transformed himself into one of the ladies- 
in-waiting on the Queen, in order to gain possession of the 
three bells. To get the Demon to show the bells, which 
were concealed under his clothes, Sun caused lice, 
fleas and bugs to worry him, till he was compelled to 
take off his garments. The Monkey then took the 
genuine bells himself, and substituted false ones for the 
Demon. 

Sun then appeared outside the gates and called upon 
the Demon to come out and fight him. He shook the 
the three bells together. At once there appeared dense 
smoke, fierce flames, and blinding sand, such as were 
never seen before. The Demon meantime, used his false 
bells, but could do nothing. 

Infuriated at being tricked, the evil spirit wished to 
avenge himself on the Queen for being in league with 
Sun. But a Taoist wizard came to her aid, and produced 
pins and needles all over her bodj-, so that the Demon 
could not approach near enough to injure her. 

Finally Kwanyin appeared, riding on a peacock, and 
called on Sun not to attack the evil Demon any further. 



THE THREE BELLS 269 

She also ordered Sun to give her the three bells, as they 

had been stolen from her by the Demon. 

When you really wish to rid yourself of doubt, 

Put an end to all selfishness, and peace comes naturally. 

What happened after this, you will hear in our next. 



CHAPTER LXXII. 

THE LOVELY WOMEN 

In the Labyrinth Cave the passions mislead. 
In the bathing spring Pa Kiei forgets himself. 

[outline.] 

(The Women. Part 1.) 

Having travelled far across many mountains, and 
passed both spring and autumn on the way, the pilgrims 
came to a village. The Master said, "You, my disciples, 
are always very good to me, taking round the begging 
bowl and finding food for me. To-daj"- I will take the 
begging bowl myself." Sun said, "That is not good! 
You should let us, j'our disciples, do this for you." But 
the Master insisted on going himself. 

When he reached the village, there was not a man 
to be seen, but onlj'- four lovely women. He did not think 
it was right for him to speak to women. On the other 
hand, if he did not procure a supper, his disciples would 
laugh at him. After deliberating for a long time, he 
went forward and begged food of them. They received 
him heartily and invited him into their cave home. 
Having learnt who he was, they ordered some food for 
him, but it was all human flesh boiled or fried. 

At the sight, the Master said he was a vegetarian. 
If he ate any of this meat he would never see God. He 
begged to be excused and rose to go. But the women 











Pa Kiei tempted at the Bathing Fool. 



THE LOVELY WOMEN 271 

would not let him go. Tney surrounded and bound him, 
thinking he would be a fine banquet for them next day. 

Then seven of the women went out to bathe in a pool. 
Meanwhile Sun, in search of his Master, found them 
bathing and would have killed them, only he thought it 
was not right to kill women. So he changed himself 
into an eagle and carried away their clothes to his nest. 
This so frightened the women, that they crouched in the 
pool, and none dared come out. 

But Pa Kiel, coming also in search of his Master, 
found the women bathing. He changed himself into 
a fish which the women tried to catch, chasing him hither 
and thither through the pool. 

Then Pa Kiel came out of the pool and appeared in 
his true form, and threatened the women for having 
bound his Master. In their fright the women fled out 
of the pool into a pavilion, round which they spun spiders' 
threads so thickly that Pa Kiel became entangled and fell. 
Then they escaped to their cave and put on some clothes. 

When Pa Kiel was able to disentangle himself from 
the webs, he saw Sun and Sa Seng approach. When 
they heard what had happened, they feared the women 
might do some mischief to the Master, so they made for 
the cave to rescue him. But on the way, they were 
beset by the seven dwarf sons of the seven women, who 
transformed themselves into a swarm of dragon flies, 
bees and other insects. Then Sun pulled out some hairs 
and, changing them into seven different swarms of flying 
insects, destroyed the hostile swarm, and the ground 
was covered a foot deep with the dead bodies. Then the 
pilgrims reached the cave, and found it deserted by the 



272 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

women. They unbound the Master, making himp romise 
never to beg for food again. He mounted on his horse 
and they proceeded on their journey. 

What befell them next, j'ou will hear later. 



CHAPTER LXXIII. 
POISONED BY WOMEN 
Hatred -Hrhen nourished long, produces illness. 

When the mind is bent on resisting the Devil, 
deliverance -will come. 

[outline] 

(TheAVomen. Part 11.) 

The four pilgrims had only travelled a little way 
when they saw a great and fine building. It was a Taoist 
temple. Sa Seng said, " Let us go in here, for Buddhism 
and Taoism teach the same things. They only differ in 
their vestments." The Taoist abbot received them 
civilly and ordered five cups of tea. Now he was in 
league with the seven women, and when the servant went 
in for tea, the sisters put poison in each cup. Sun, 
however, had suspected treason, and did not take his tea. 
Finding the rest poisoned, he then went and attacked the 
sisters, who transformed themselves into huge spidere. 
They could spin ropes out of their bellies and bind any 
enemy. He attacked and killed them. 

At this the Taoist abbot showed himself in his true 
form, a Demon with a thousand eyes. He gave fierce 
battle to Sun, and finally succeeded in putting him under 
an extinguisher. This was a new art which Sun could not 
understand. However, after trying to break out at the top 
and sides in vain, he thought he would bore downwards, 
and finding that the extinguisher was not deep in the 
earth, he escaped from below. But he feared that his 



274 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Master and fellow-disciples would die of the poison. In 
this dire distress there came a Buddhisatva, Lady Pi 
Lan to his rescue. By her magic he broke the extingui- 
sher, gave his Master and fellow disciples pills to 
counteract the poison, and so rescued them. 

The Master, his life saved, was grateful to Lady Pi Lan 
Who ended her work by driving out the many-eyed Devil. 
But the Pilgrims, on leaving, burnt the Taoist temple. 
Truly the Chinese priest owed his life to Pi Lan. 
And was delivered from the many-eyed Demon. 

What happened after this, you will hear in what 
follows. 



CHAPTER LXXIV. 
TflE THREE DEMONS 
Chang Keng exposes the chief oi the devils. 
Practical Sun sho-vsrs his great transforming 
poAver. 

[outline.] 
(The Three Demons. Part I.) 
The Poet says, 

Desires and passions have the same beginning. 

With passions and desires, how can tliere be peace ? 

The Shaman Scholars, with all their differences, 

Have bnt one aim: to end desire and passion. 

To set the mind upon a single purpose. 

When fully cleansed from the stains ot earth, 

One is perfected for Heaven. 

To continue in virtue is never wrong. 

When good work is full and accomplished, 

One then attains to sainthood. 

The Pilgrims, having escaped out of the net of desire, 
travelled westwards, and the autumn commenced. 

Being warned not to travel in a certain direction, as 
it was full of Demons, the Master was anxious to find a 
safer way, but there was none. Sun was sent forward 
to make inquiries about the way, the names of the 
Demons, and where tbey lived. Pie transformed himself 
into one of the soldiers of the chief Demon, put on their 
uniform, and carried a bell and a wooden clapper, like 
theirs. From his companions he learnt that they lived in 
the Lion and Camel Cave, Anth ten thousand small demons 
in attendance. The three Chiefs, having learnt that the 



276 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Royal Ambassador was approaching, under the escort of 
the terrible Sun, had decided to unite in watching and 
attacking the Pilgrim jjarty. Being in a sentinel's uni- 
form, Sun boldly approached the Cave.. He was asked 
if he had seen the terrible Sun. He replied, " Yes, he is 
more than a hundred feet tall. In his hand he beare an 
iron club as stout as your leg, and he has already killed 
ten thousand of our soldiers." At this, the rest were 
struck with terror and fled. Sun was verj' pleased at this, 
and went inside the cave to see the three Chiefs. 

What happened at the interview, you will learn iu 
our next. 



CHAPTER LXXV. 

SUN PERSONATES A DEMON SOLDIER 

The heart having decided on celibacy, 
The Devil adopts the true religious life. 

[outline.] 
(The Three Demons. Part II.) 

Sun, in the form of one of their soldiers, told them 
that he had seen Sun, who was 100 feet tall, sharpening 
his spear to attack the Demons and their tens of thousands 
of followers. At this the terrified Demons ordered the 
doors to be closed. 

The chief Demon then said the speaker must be Sun 
himself, who was personifying one of our soldiers. Sun 
was arrested forthwith, stripped, and placed in a jar, 
where in a short time he would be reduced to a pool of 
blood. He first felt cold, then hot, as if he were burning 
in flames. Then he remembered that Kwanyin had 
given him three hairs which could save him in extremity. 
He tested their powers and escaped out of the jar. Then 
Sun called on the chief Demon to come out of the cave 
and fight him. The Demon said, ' ' Let us two fight 
alone without any assistance." After fighting, the 
Demon asked, " Who are you who dares to fight with me, 
and whom no weapon seems to hurt?" Sun replied, 

"I was born with a brass head and an iron cap to my 
brains, 

AVhen young I went into the crucible of the Ancient of Days, 

Four dipper stars watched the work, the twenty-eight Cons- 
tellations assisted. 



278 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

They manufactured a thousand indestructible weapons. 

Such as never, existed belore. 

To complete my armour, the hat of spikes was added." 

They fought a terrible battle, and the Demon was 
allowed to strike three times before Stin began to strike. 
At one stroke Sun was cut in two like a melon. But he 
laughed, saying, "I am now two complete Suns, and if cut 
into ten thousand j)ieces I shall be ten thousand Suns! " 
The Demon said, " To multiplj' yourself is easj', but you 
cannot unite yourself again." At this Sun turned a 
somersault and was united into one as before. Then the 
Demon chief opened his gigantic mouth and swallowed 
him alive. Now Sun gave him great pains, so that the 
Demon took emetics to cast him out. But Sun said he 
was too comfortable to come out; he meant to pass the 
winter there as it was warm ; he would set up a kitchen, 
and cook the Demon's -^-itals on a tripod of bones, from: 
time to time, as he required food. 

Soon he produced such terrible agony inside, that 
the Demon was thrown into convulsions on the ground. 

Whether he lived or died from this, j-ou shall know 
in our next. 



CHAPTER LXXVI. 

RIDING WITH EIGHT BEARERS 

The Monkey soul is firm since his conversion. 
Pa Kieiis deliveredand follows in the true way. 

[outline. J 
(The Three Demons. Part III.) 

The Demon chief at last begged Sun to come forth 
as he acknowledged his defeat. But the two younger 
chiefs privatel}' urged him to close his jaws as Sun came 
out so as to make an end of him. But Sun overheard 
the suggestion, and would not come out without making 
careful arrangements in case of any mishap. When he 
came out he began to fight the Demon again, and finally 
defeated him. 

After Sun had conquered the chief Demon, the two 
younger ones came forth and challenged him. But he 
sent- Pa Kiel to fight with them. After seven or eight 
bouts he was defeated and fled. The Demons pursued 
him and took him, by the snout, back to their cave. The 
Master, seeing this, urged Sun to rescue him. So, 
transforming himself into an insect, Sun alighted on 
Pa Kiel's ear and entered the cave. The two Demons 
brought their captive in triumph to the elder chief. 
But he said thej* had been foolish to capture Pa Kiel, 
since he was of no use at all. On hearing this, Pa Kiel 
cried out, " Since I am no good, why then, let me go, 
and you can capture my fellow pilgrim ! ' ' The Demons, 



280 mSSTON TO HEAVEN 

however, threw him bound into a tank, where he 
floundered, half swimming, half sinking, and blowing 
through his snout in a ridiculous fashion. 

Sun thought this an excellent opportunity to 
revenge himself on Pa Kiei for having made the Master 
repeat the incantation against him so often, causing 
the spikes to enter his head. He resolved to give Pa 
Kiei a good fright. So he impersonated a messenger 
from Hades and told Pa Kiei that his last hour was 
approaching. Pa Kiei begged that his death might be 
postponed, and gave up to Sun some money he had been 
secretly hoarding. Then Sun made himself known, and 
laughed at Pa Kiei, who cursed him in the water. After 
this. Sun rescued him from the tank, unbound him and 
led him to a small side door. They rushed out together 
and killed countless numbers of Demons. 

Then the Demon chiefs met together and agreed to 
carry the Master across four hundred li of the mountain. 
They treated him with great honour, and he was carried 
by eight beai'ers. But the younger chiefs resolved to 
have their revenge on the pilgrims on the other half of 
the mountain, where they alone ruled. All this time, 
Sun the Practical would not trust the j'oung Demons, so 
kept a careful watch. "When they reached the first city 
of the district ruled by the younger Demon chiefs, his 
suspicions were further aroused. 

Whether his life was safe or not, you will hear in 
the nest chapter. 



CHAPTER LXXVII. 

RUMOUR OF THE MASTER'S DEATH 

The legions of Demons give up their devil 
nature. 

With one mind they ■worship the True Model 
(Chin Ju.) 

[outline.] 

(The Three Demons. Part IV.) 

The Demons fought again, and Pa Kiel and Sa Seng 
were captured. Sun fled, was captured and taken back 
to the city, and all four were bound in the order they 
were to be eaten, and were made ready to be cooked. 

Seeing this. Sun changed himself into a false Sun, 
and, leaving the false one bound, escaped outside. The 
Demons retired to sleep, expecting to feast on the Master 
next morning, in the hope that all who ate of his flesh 
would become immortal. 

The cooks were ordered to attend to their fire and 
roast. But Sun sent the cooks sleeping insects, that made 
them all fall asleep, and forget the fires. Then he went 
round and unbound his Master and his fellow pilgrims, 
but found all the gates locked. The three disciples could 
easily pass through the locked doors, but their Master, 
being a mortal, could not get out, so Sa Seng and 
Pa Kiel remained behind with him. Meantime, finding 
that Sun had outwitted them and escaped, the Demon 
chief said, "In the garden there is an arbour where 
there is a cupboard, let us hide the Master there, and 



282 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

circulate tlie rumour that ve have eaten him alive." 
This news was told to Pa Kiel and Sa Seng. 

When Sun heard of his Master's death, he wept 
bitterty, and seemed to lose his faitli altogether, and 
thought within himself, ' It is all very well for God to 
live an idle life in Paradise, while troubling my Master 
to seek for Scriptures. If he really means to stive men, 
why does he not send the Scriptures himself to the 
East? Why does he expect us from the East to go through 
all these interminable dangei-s, and thus end our life 
■without accomplishing his purposes? This will never 
do, I will go and see Julai myself, and tell him all this. 
If he gives rne the Scriptures to take back with me to 
the East, then some good will be done, and the original 
purpose will be accomplished. If he does not give them 
to me, I shall ask him to take back the spiked hat, 
which he gave me to wear, and let me return to the cave 
in my old mountain home.' 

He -went to see Julai in the Pao Lien Tai Palace, 
and after prostrating himself before him, said, ' 'Since my 
conversion, I have escorted the Master to fetch the Holy 
Scriptures, and have suffered unutterable hardships. 
Now I have arrived at the Lion and Camel Cave, where 
there are three terrible Demons, who have taken mj- 
Master captiA-e and eaten him alive, and his disciples 
Pa Kiel and Sa Sfeng are also taken and bound. 
Being driven to despair, I have come to beg for a great 
favour. Receive back the spiked hat and let me return 
to my old mountain cave. You know that since I was 
made into a man, and converted, I have never failed in 
my duty. But this time these Demons are more than a 



RUMOUR OP THE MASTER'S DEATH 283 

match for me." Juki said, "Do not be alarmed, I know 
the Demons." Then said Sim quickly, "You must be 
in league with them ! " Juki said, "Listen, the first and 
second Demons are really a peacock and a roc, and are 
servants of Manjusri (Wen Shu) of Wu Tai Shan in 
Shansi, and Pu Hien, of Omei Shan in Szechuan. In 
the beginning, when all things M^ere produced, among 
the beasts the Kilin was chief, among birds the Feng 
Hwang was chief. The Feng Hwang gave birth to the 
peacock and the roc. When thej' appeared, they were great 
eaters of men. Once, on the top of a snow mountain, I, 
although 16 feet tall, was swallowed by a peacock. But 
I bored a hole through his back, and rode him to the Ling 
Shan, intending to kill him. But all the enlightened 
advised me against this, as it would seem as if I had 
killed my mother. That is why we have kept the 
Peacock, at Ling Shan, and called it the Illustrious 
Peacock, or Buddha's Mother. The great roc too is 
born of the same mother as the peacock. That is how 
we are related. I must go with you to subdue these 
Demons." 

Juki summoned Weu Shu and Pu Hien to help 
in recalling their servants, and they all went to the 
Demon Cave. Sun attacked the Demons again, but when 
he was apparently defeated. Wen Shu and Pu Hien cried 
out to their former servants, "What do you two Demons 
mean by still refusing to follow the right way?" At 
this the Demons appeared in the forms of a blue lion and 
a white elephant. Wen Shu Pusa and Pu Hien Pusa 
then rode off on them with Lotus saddles. The Master 
was found unhurt in the arbour. 



284 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

The true Scriptures, must be got from a true man. 
The assumed teachings of Demons are all false. 
Where tlie part}' went now you must read in our 
next. 



CHAPTER LXXVIII. 

THE DOOMED CHILDREN SAVED 

The Pilgrims send gods to hide the doomed 
children. 

A Demon in form of a Taoist priest discusses 
religion. 

[outline] 

(The Doomed Children. Parti.) 
After travelling for several months the Pilgrims 
arrived at a city where little boj's were laid out in 
cradles at each house door. The Master was curious to 
know the meaning of the custom. He learnt that a 
Taoist priest had deceived the King, and persuaded him 
that he could obtain immortality by taking a certain 
medicine, which was manufactured from the livers of 
little boys. These boys were to be presented and killed 
on the morrow, to cure the king. 

Sun called on his friendly spirits to carry away 
each of the cradles and children in the night, and hide 
them for a day or two. 

On the morrow all the ofHcials, civil and military, 
presented themselves at the temple, and announced that 
by some magic all the children had been spirited awaj"^, 
so that the King could not procure the much-coveted 
medicine. The King was much displeased at this, but 
the proud Taoist said, " You need not be troubled, for 
Heaven has sent you what is much better than the 
livers of little boys. There is a Pilgrim here who has 



286 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

been a Buddhist all his days. Let him be killed and 
his heart used." 

At this the pilgrims were in the greatest danger 
again. But Sun said, "I can save my Master." He 
said to his Master, " Let us exchange places. You take 
my form, and I yours." When the King's orders came 
for the arrest of the Master, the pilgrims were ready. 

The Wizard pretended pity for the king, 

But his pity involved great cruelty. 

How Sun's life was finally saved, you shall hear in 
our next. 



CHAPTER LXXIX. 
SUN PERFORMS KARA KIRI 
While in search of the demon priest an old 
znan is xaet. 

The saved boys become Buddhist disciples. 

f OUTLINE.] 

(The Doomed Children. Part II. ) 

By the King's orders, soldiers came and took away 
the Master to the temple, where his heart was to be cut 
out to cure the king. 

" I have many hearts (minds)," said the pretended 
Master, "which one does the king require?" The 
Taoist wizard priest replied, " Your black (bad) heart." 
AVith this Sun cut himself open before the astonished 
gathering, and his inside tumbled out in heaps before 
them. The Taoist priest said, " The Buddhist priest is 
full of all kinds of black arts.' ' Sun picked out various 
hearts dripping with blood, but none of them were black, 
and he asked, " Is it this Avhite heart, this yellow heart, 
this heart, ambitious for riches or fame, or this jealous 
heart, filled with desire to be first and foremost, or this 
heart full of desire to be honourable, or to be careful? 
These I can give you, but there is not a single bad or 
black heart or desire." At this the King was bewildered 
and said, "Stop, we do not want anj' more of this," 
But the pretended Master said, "How blind you have 
been, king! It is this Taoist priest who has the 



288 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

black heart. Let me show it to you," and in a moment 
the Practical Sun changed into his own form, and made 
for the Taoist priest, who recognised him as the Great 
Hoi}'- One, who^had thrown Heaven itself into a turmoil 
500 years before. 

The priest then fled with the queen, but Sun 
followed them, and by the aid of the local gods found 
their hiding place. The old minister of the Star of 
Longevity of the South Pole assisted in capturing them, 
and bringing them back to the city. There they 
changed into their true forms, one a white deer, and the 
other a fox. 

The whole citj' was thus delivered, and the parents 
of the boys would not let the pilgrims leave, till they had 
shown their great gratitude. 

Goodness done in secret led to the salvation of a 
thousand lives. These saved boys naturally became 
Buddhist disciples. 

To know what hajspened after this, you must listen 
to our next. 



CHAPTER LXXX. 

THE MASTER BEWITCHED 

A beautiful woman in search of a husband. 
The Monkey recog^nises a witch. 

[outline.] 
(The Witch. Part I.) 

After having travelled some twenty li, they entered 
a dark pine forest where thej'' found a young woman 
bound to a tree with the lower half of her body buried in 
the earth. She begged them to save her. Sun, the 
Practical, warned the Master that it was a deception. 
But the woman pleaded that to save a life was better than 
to travel far to fetch Scriptures, or to spend much money 
in building pagodas. The Master therefore ordered his 
disciples to unbind and help her. Sun said, "If you do- 
save her, do not blame me if j-ou get into trouble." She 
was rescued and travelled with them much against Sun's 
will. 

When night came they arrived at a great temple. 
The first and second courts were fallen into ruin, and were 
left as quarters for robbers at night. But the inner court 
was occupied by Lamas who had beautiful rooms and 
lived in luxury. Still, they were astonished that the 
Pilgrims had a M'oman with them. 

To acciimnlate merit, good works must proceed from a 

pitiful lieart. 
The Buddhist religion flourishes when priests can be 

praised. 

What befell the Pilgrims at the temple you will learn 
from our next. 



CHAPTER LXXXI. 

THE MASTER RESIGNS HIS MISSION 

At Tsin Kai Sze tlie monkey recognises the 
witch. 

The three disciples search the pine forest. 

[outlike. J 
(The Witch. Part II.) 

Having arrived at the temple the Master fell ill. 
He called for paper and ink and in a fit of despair wrote 
a despatch to be delivered to his Emperor in Changan. 
Practical Sun said, " There are many things I cannot do, 
but though Changan is very far, I can deliver that in no 
time. Let me hear what you have written . ' ' The Master 
read, " When bj' your command I left the East to go to 
Ling Shan, and see the most honoured of the world, I did 
not realise the dangers, nor expect to be taken ill, when 
only halfway, so that I fear I cannot proceed farther. 
Though I have entered the Buddhist religion as a disciple, 
I still find Heaven's gate very far. If I do not live to 
obtain the Scriptures, all the trouble will have been in 
vain. I beg your Majesty not to insist on my travelling 
any farther for the Scriptures." 

When Sun heard this, he smiled and said, "Tell me 
frankly whether you want to live or die. I have some 
ability. I can see the Judge of Hades, and make such a 
confusion in Hades as I did in Heaven. You, Master, 
were the second of Julai 's great prophets, and were an 
angel of promise, called Kin Shen (the Golden Cicada) 



THE :\IASTER BEWITCHED 291 

but because you once despised Buddha's law, you are now 
made to suffer tliese difficulties. You will be quite well 
in a day or two." The Master called for water, and Sun 
went out to ask for it. When he went out, he found 
all the priests in a terrible plight. Some devils had 
broken into the temple, aud carried away six of their 
number to be eaten. 

The Master was greatly alarmed at this, wondering 
who the devil could be. Sun well knew it was the woman 
who had misled the young priests, and he determined to 
attack her that evening. He did so, and she assumed her 
natural form , and fought desperately till she was obliged 
to yield. But in j-ielding, she caused a great wind to 
arise and the Master was carried away by it. 

The disciples at this were greatly alarmed, and 
searched for him all through the pine forest. Finally 
they learnt that he was not there, but a thousand li away 
at Hien Kang Shan. 

What happened to them now, you will learn from 
our next. 



CHAPTER LXXXII. 

HIDDEN IN A CAVE 

The witch seeks a husband. 

The Divine in Sun comes to the rescue. 

[outline] . 
(The Witch. Part III.) 

The pilgrims at last learnt their Master was in the 
deepest cave of a dangerous hollow mountain. They 
overheard the talk of two witches drawing water at a well , 
in preparation for the wedding of their mistress with the 
Master, whom she had carried away to her cave. 

Sun advised his Master to agree to take her, the witch, 

into the garden that night. Sun transformed himself 

into a peach, which the Master presented to his hride. 

As soon as she had swallowed the peach, Sun caused her 

terrible pain, and threatened to kill her outright, unless 

she promised to carry his Master on her back, out through 

the long labyrinth enti-ance of the cave, and set him free. 

Truly. 

The conquest of evil from within 
Ends in joyous reunion without. 

But how it fared finally with the witch, you must 
learn from our next. 



CHAPTER LXXXIII. 

SUN CHARGES PRINCE LI WITH TREASON 

Sun has a glimpse of the truth. 

The witch then regains her original nature. 

[outline.] 
(The Witch. PartlY.) 
The Master was carried out, and Sun was then spat 
forth as a date. Then he and the witch had a terrible 
fight with each other. 

One was natarally a heaven-sent heart and body, 

The other was a human spirit in the witch. 

The one sought a partner of Heaven's appointment, 

The other sought against nature to produce a Holy race. 

When two extremes like fire and water meet, then harm is 

done, 

When two laws of nature cannot unite, let theni be apart. 
Having rescued the Master, Sun and his two 
comrades began discussing what to do next, and the 
Master sat dowTi bewildered. Seeing that she could not 
fight Sun successfully, once more the witch caused a 
great wind to rise, and whirled the Master away again 
into the cave, together with his horSe and baggage. She 
was determined he should marry her. At this time Sun 
was in great perplexity about his Master, for the cave 
was 300 li in extent and not easy to search. But during 
his search he smelt incense. Going in its direction he 
found a tablet on which was written, ' To the honour 
of my father, Li, Guardian-King of Heaven,' and there 
stood an incense burner before it. 



294 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

At this, Sun carried out the tablet and burner to the 
mouth of the cave, and said with great glee, "We have 
found her secret now. She is none other than the 
daughter of Li, the Guardian-King of Heaven, and a 
sister of the third Prince Na-to, and it is she who has 
come to earth, and carried away our Master." Sun's 
comrades asked him, "But have you found our Master?" 
Sun replied, "No, but I have thought of a good plan that 
will save him." "What is that?" "I am going to 
charge the Guardian -King of Heaven with treason. 
That will soon bring him. Bring me paper and ink at 
once." Then he wrote a charge against Li To-ta, the 
Guardian-King of Heaven, and against Prince Na-to, who 
has been so careless about his family, as to let one of the 
ladies of his family go down to earth, and live in the 
Hien Kang Shan, in the deepest cave, as a witch. Pa 
Kiei and Sa Seng said, "That is true, and Heaven should 
know it. Go at once ! " 

Sun mounted the clouds and in a short time reached 
the South Gate of Heaven. The four great generals paid 
him their resisectsand asked, "Why does the Great Holy 
One come here now?" The Practical Sun replied, "I 
have come to make complaint against two men." The 
generals were astonished and said, " AVe wonder whose 
skin will get it now." They Avere obliged to lead him 
to the Ling Shao Hall. Sun the Pmctical then put down 
the tablet and the incense burner, made his obeisance 
to the Celestial Ruler, and then handed over to him his 
complaint. The Celestial Sovereign read it through, and 
ordered that the angel of the planet Venus (Tai Pei) 
should go, together with the plaintiff, to the Yuen Low 



SUN CHiVKGES PRINCE LI WITH TREASON 295 

Palace, and let the Celestial Prince Li To-Ta explain the 
matter. Sun and the angel mounted the clouds for that 
court. 

They soon arrived there and the pages announced 
them, saying, "His Honour the angel Tai Pei has come." 
The Celestial Guardian-King came out to meet him. 
Seeing that the angel carried an edict, he ordered the 
burning of incense. On turning round he saw Sun 
following. The Guardian-King quickly asked, " What 
kind of edict do j-ou bring?" The angel replied, "It 
is Sun, the Great Holy One, who makes a charge against 
you." The Guardian -King, hearing of a charge against 
himself, became verj'^ angry and asked, "With what does 
he charge me?" Tai Pei replied, " He charges you for 
keeping a witch to injure people, and allowing incense to 
be burnt to other gods. Please look at the charge 
yourself." The Guardian-King, full of anger, had the 
incense burnt, worshipped towards the Celestial throne 
and then opened the Edict. It was as Tai Pei had said. 
Full of anger, he struck the incense table, and said, 
"This Monkey has made a mistake in charging me.*' 
The angel said, "Do not be angry, look at the evidence 
of the tablet and the incense burner which say that she 
is your own daughter." The Guardian-King said, "I 
have only three sons and one daughter. My eldest son, 
Kin-to, is in waiting on Julai, and was formerly in the 
Office for the Defence of the Faith. My second son, Mu-to 
is in the Southern Ocean, studj'ing under Kwanj'in. My 
third son is Na-to, who is, with me, in constant attendance 
at court. I have one daughter named Pao Ying, who ia 
just seven years of age. Being too young to understand 



296 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

human relations, liow can she do the work of a witch? 
If you do not believe, I will have her carried out for you 
to see. This Moukej' Chief is reallj' outrageous in hig 
charges. Remember too that I am of the Celestial 
World, and am given power to execute anyone, without 
memorializng for permission first. Even were I one of 
the common people on the earth, I should not be falsely 
accused, for the law says a false charge should be punish- 
ed threefold. Let my men bind this Monkey Chief 1" 
Instantly the great generals in waiting, Ruling, Yatu, 
and Yakcha came forward and bound Sun. The angel 
cried, " Guardian-King Li, take care you do not get 
into trouble. We bring you a Celestial edict. How can 
you order your officers to bind one who bears this edict?" 

The Guardian-King said, "Tell me, angel Tai Pei, 
how I should deal with a false charge Uke this. Please 
sit down. Let me get the sword with which I execute 
devils, and have this Monkey Chief beheaded, and then 
we can go together and report to His Celestial Majesty," 
When Tai Pei saw the sword, he was really alarmed 
aibout Sun, but Sun, not in the least afi-aid, smiled, and 
said to Tai Pei quietly, "Do not be alaiined about me, I 
am accustomed to losing at first, but in the end I always 
win." Before he had finished his sentence, the 
Guardian-King raised his sword and was going to strike 
Sun. But before the stroke fell, the third Prince came 
forward and seizing the sword cried, "Father, do not be 
angry ! " At this the father, instead of being more angry 
that his son should resist him, was alarmed.. There was 
a reason for it. 

When this third Prince was born, in his left palni 




Prince To Ta, 

The Pagoda has a mystic meaning, viz., Where the 

Divine resides. 



li",' 



SUN CHARGES PRINCE LI WITH TREASON 297 

was the character Na, and in his right palm was the 
character To, and that was why he was named Na-to. 
This Prince once went to bathe in the sea, and got into 
trouble by going into the Dragon's crystal Palace, and 
seizing a dragon there, in order to make a bow-string out 
of his muscles. When the Guai-dian-King heard of it, he 
was afraid of future troubles, and wished to kill his son. 
The son became very angrj', took a sword and cut off 
his flesh and gave it to his mother, and cut off his bones 
and returned them to his father. His soul departed and 
went to Heaven to inform Buddha. Julai had just 
dismissed his pupils, to whom he had been preaching, 
when he heard a cry, " Murder, help, help!" Buddha 
knew it was Na-to. He gave him a new body, and read 
over him the magic words which give life to the dead, 
and Na-to was given a new life to rule over 96 demons, 
and with wonderful magic powers. He wished to kill 
his father for attempting to kill him. In this strait 
the Guardian-King was obliged to beg Julai for his own 
life. Julai gave him charge of a golden Pagoda. 
Hence the Guardian-King was called Li To Ta (Pagoda- 
bearer) Guardian-King. Each storj'' of the Pagoda had 
an image of Buddha, and Na-to was to REGARD 
BUDDHA AS FATHER, so as to end the strife between 
father and son. 

The Guardian-King said to Na-to, "Son, you 
have something to say." This was the reason why the 
father showed no anger. Na-to went on his knees, 
kowtowed, and said, " Father, there is a daughter in 
the earth world, whom j-ou have forgotten, and she is a 
witch. Three hundred yeai-s ago she stole some 



298 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

fragrant candles from Ling Shan, and Julai sent you 
and me to arrest her, and by right she should have been 
put to death then. But we spared her life, and she in 
gratitude worships you as her father, and honoui-s me as 
brother, and that is the explanation of tablet and 
incense burner in her cave." The King was astonished 
and said, " Child, I had completely forgotten her. What 
is her name?" The Prince replied," She has three 
names. Originally she was called Golden-nosed-white- 
Eat. On account of hei fondness for fragrant incense^ 
she was called Half-Kwanyin. Now she is called the 
Brave-Lady-of -the-Earth. ' ' 

After hearing this, the Guardian-King ordered Sun 
to be unbound. But Sun would not hear of it. 
" Carry me bound to the Celestial Sovereign, or if you 
will not carry me, I will roll mj'self bound to His. 
presence." At this the Guardian-King became much 
alarmed. Tai Pei strove to make peace and said to 
Sun, " Oh Monkey, you are too wilful, j'ou should 
remember past kindness." "And what kindness have 
you shown me?" The angel of Venus replied "I 
recommended you to be made the Great Holy One, the 
Equal of Heaven, but you did not behave yourself. " Suu 
said, " I committed no crime, I only made a disturbance 
in Heaven. Still, for your sake, I will let the 
Guardian-King come himself and unbind me." 

Then, instead of disgracing the Guardian-King^ 
Sun agreed to Tai Pel's suggestion that, if a Celestial 
arm\' were sent to put down the witch, he would say 
nothing about his bonds, or the sword drawn to kill 
him. 



SUN CHARGES PKINCE LI WITH TREASON 299< 

Then the soldiers arrived and captured the witch,, 
while Sun hurried away with his Master on their 
journey. Truly, 

The Jungle of difficulties ia cut through, 
The sea of trouble is dried up, 
The locks are broken, 
The prisoner is released. 

How they fared further on their journey, you wilt 
read in our next. 



CHAPTER LXXXIV. 

SUN SHAVES A WHOLE CITY 

It is difficult to stamp out the Great Wisdom. 
It is important to have an uprig^ht religrious 
Head. 

[outline, J 

The summer had now arrived. On the road they 
met an old lady and a little boj'. The old lady said, 
"You are priests, do not go forward, for this country 
before you is called the country that exterminates 
religion. They have vowed to kill ten thoiisand 
priests. They have already killed that number with 
the exception of four noted ones whose arrival they 
soon expect, and then their number will be full." 

This old lady was Kwanyin, with Shen Tsai 
(Steward) who had come to give them warning. At 
this. Sun changed himself into a candle moth and flew 
into the city to examine for himself. He entered an 
inn and heard the innkeeper warning his guests to look 
after their own clothes and belongings when thej' went 
to sleep. In order to travel safely through the city, he 
decided that they all should put on turbans and clothing, 
like the rest of the people, or they would be killed. 
Knowing from the innkeeper's warning that thieving 
was common. Sun stole some clothing and turbans for 
his Master and comrades. Then he returned, and 
fetched them to the inn at dusk, representing himself as 
a great horse dealer. 



SUN SHAVES A WHOLE CITY 301 

At the inn are revealed the bad customs of the 
country towards their guests. 

Sun, fearing that in their sleep their turbans would 
fall off, and their shaven heads be revealed, arranged for 
them all to sleep in a cupboard, which they asked the 
landlady to loci. 

During the night, robbers came and carried the 
cupboard away, thinking it was full of silver to buy 
horses. "When the watchman saw many men carrying 
this, he became suspicious, and the soldiers were called 
out. At this, the robbers ran away, leaving the 
cupboard in the open. The Master was very angry 
with Sun for getting him into this danger. He feared 
that at daylight they would be discovered and all 
executed. But Sun said, "Do not be alarmed I will 
save you yet!" He changed himself into an ant and 
escaped outside the cupboard. Then he plucked out 
some hairs and changed them into a thousand monkeys 
like himself. To each he gave a razor and some 
sleeping insects. They were to place the insects on the 
king and all the officials and their wives, and when they 
were asleep, the monkeys were to shave their .heads. 

On the morrow there was a terrible commotion in 
the whole city, as all the leaders and their families 
found themselves shaved like Buddhists. 

Thus the Master was saved again . 

How they fared afterwards, you will hear in our 
next. 



CHAPTER LXXXV. 

THE BAD ATTACK THE GOOD 

The Wild heart of man is jealous. 

The Demon wishes to swallow the Good. 

[outline.] 

When the ministers came to court next morning, all 
Tveeping and begging the King to save their lives, the 
King confessed that the same thing had been done in 
his palace, and no more shaved heads -were to be execut- 
ed. All bowed before the Master in repentance for hav- 
ing vowed to massacre priests. The pilgrims then went 
on their way. 

They had not gone far when the Master, seeing 

smoke coming out of a mountain in front, was alarmed. 

But the Monkey said, " Why do you not recite your 

Heart Creed?" The Master recited it, but the Monkey 

said, " You have not recited it all, you have forgotten 

four lines: — 

Seek not God in far-off land, 
Seek him in your inward soul. 
There set up a holy shrine, 
There let worship be. 

In front of this mountain was a Demon Avith some 

scores of smaller devils on his right and left. One of these 

advised the chief to be careful in attacking the Master. 

" His chief disciple. Sun, has terrible powers, which I 

witnessed at the Lion and Camel cave, before escaping 

here (Chap. 74) . If you have de<;-ided to attack the Master 



THE BAD ATTACK THE GOOD 303 

and eat his flesh, so as to live for ever, I advise you 
to choose the best hundred among a thousand of your 
warriors, and of these select the best ten, and of these 
again choose the best three. With their help you may 
attack the pilgrims, divide their forces, and when none of 
the disciples are near, j'ou can snatch the Master away." 

In this way the ^Master was caught and boujid. 
There was a woodcutter bound in the same place waiting 
to be cooked. He told the Master he had a mother, 83 
years of age, dependent on him, and if he died no one 
would look after her. The Master said , "That is small 
trouble compared with mine. If I am killed, the Emperor 
of China's voav, to save all the sufferers in Hell, will not 
be accomplished. Still, some may say that filial piety to 
the parent is as important as loyalty to the so^•ereign." 

AVhen the Monkey returned, from chasing the 

demons, the Master had disappeared. Alas, 

The helpless orphan floated from one danger to anotlier. 
The Great Holy One, after conquering one enemy, met 
another. 

Where he found his Master, you shall hear in our 

next. 



CHAPTER LXXXVI. 

THE MASTER'S HEAD EXPOSED 

Pa Kiel helps to subdue the Demon. 

The Master uses religion to comfort the 
distressed. 

[OUTLIXE.] 

Having searched the district for a distance of about 
twenty li, the disciples came upon a cave inscribed with 
the woi'ds, ' The Cave of the Cold Mountain Mist. ' 
This was the home of the Demon, and here the Master 
was kept. But the little demons resolved to deceive the 
pilgrims. They brought out a head, saying that they 
had all taken part in eating the Master, and that only 
bis head remained. Pa Kiel began to weep, but Sun 
believed it was a false hetid, and taking it, struck it 
against a rock. Then they found it was made of the 
root of a willow. 

The little demons withdrew into the cave once more, 
and brought out a real man's head, dripping with blood. 
This time all three disciples believed it was their Master's. 
They wept bitterly and reverently buried it. Leaving 
Sa Seng to take care of the grave and the baggage. Sun 
and Pa Kiel determined to take revenge on the demons 
for their Master's death. The Demon led out all his 
forces against them, but Sun, plucking out some of his 
hairs, changed them into monkeys like himself, each 
armed with a terrible spear. Thej' killed numbers of 
demons, so that the chief fled to his cave. 



THE MASTER'S HEAD EXPOSED 305 

Sun then left Pa Kiel at the grave with Sa Seng, and, 
changing himself into a winged ant, crept through the 
door of the cave. He found the Master and the wood- 
cutter bound in a little courtyard at the back. Return- 
ing to the cave, he caused number of sleeping insects to 
crawl over all the demons, so that they fell fast asleep. 
Then he liberated his Master and the woodcutter, and led 
them to Sa Seng and Pa Kiel. When they realised it 
was the Master and not his ghost, they were overcome 
with joy. The woodcutter then showed Pa Kiel where 
to find dry fuel to burn the cave, and when it was set 
alight, Pa Kiel fanned the flames with his long ears. 
The little demons were all burnt, and the chief Demon, 
when he awoke, was struck dead by Pa Kiel. 

The woodcutter told the pilgrims that they had only 
a thousand li more to travel, and that they are nfearing 
the borders of the Happy Land. The Master and disci- 
ples set forth on their journey with great joy. 



CHAPTER LXXXVII. 
SUN CALLS DOWX RAIN 

A great drought at the Prefecture of Feng 
Shan. 

The Great Holy One exhorts men to repent 
and gets rain. 

[outline.] 

The party now arrived at Feng Shan citj' under 
the rule of India. In the city they found the Prefect 
had put out a proclamation offering a thousand taels 
to any one who could bring down rain, for there had 
been a drought for three years, and two-thirds of the 
people had died of starvation. Grain cost a hundred 
taels a bushel ; girls of ten j'ears of age were sold for 
three pints of grain ; boys of five years of age were given 
away as slaves, to any one who would have them for 
nothing. All clothes and furniture were being pawned 
in order to raise money to keep body and soul together. 
There was no security for life in the land, and desperate 
men carried people awaj', and ate them to keep themselves 
from starvation. This was the reason why the great 
reward was offered. 

Sun told the Prefect that he could call down rain. 
He siunmoned the Pain Diagon, who said to him, 
" Obtain an Edict from Heaven to sanction rain and I 
will give you as much as j-ou desire." At this. Sun 
flew away to Heaven. Meanwhile the Prefect ordered 



SUN CALLS DOWN RAIN 307 

each family to reverence the Tablet of the Eain Dragon, 
and burn incense to him, to put out water jars and 
willow branches at their doors, and to worship Heaven. 

When Sun presented his request in Heaven, he was 
told b}' the Celestial Ruler that the city did not deserve 
rain, as their Prefect had committed a great sin. 

On the 25th day of the 12th moon,* which was the day 
when the Celestial Ruler went forth to inspect Heaven and 
earth. He had found an altar prepared for worship with 
showbread, etc. on it in the Feng Shan city, but, owing 
to a quarrel between the Prefect and his wife, the altar 
had been upset and the oflEerings prepared for the gods 
had been thrown to the dogs. This was an offence 
beyond pardon, so the prefecture was punished with 
drought. This was to last till a mountain of rice 1,000 
feet high had been all eaten up by a chicken the size of 
a man's fist, and till a mountain of flour 200 feet high 
had been licked up by a little pet dog, and a metal lock 13 
inches long, which had a bolt of the thickness of one's 
finger, had been burnt through by an ordinary lamp. 
But one of the great angels told Sun, "Do not be 
discouraged at this, for if the Prefect truly repents, all 
this will come to pass. ' ' 

Sun returned from heaven, and told the Prefect 
that repentance was necessary before Heaven would 
grant pardon. Then the Prefect and people vowed to 
repent, to repair to the temples, recite prayers, and 
worship Buddha with the priests. Sun carried this 
promise to Heaven to show the Celestial Sovereign. 
Whilst he was presenting this, the angel, whose duty 

'Does this mean Christmas day ?— Tr. 



308 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

it was to report the quantities of incense burnt, an- 
nounced that the rice and flour mountains had both 
fallen and disappeared, and that the metal lock had been 
broken. After this, rain fell to the great joy of all. The 
people offered money to the Pilgrims for what they had 
done, but they would not receive any. The officials and 
people escorted them thirty li on their journey, and 
parted with them in tears. 

Thus the divine Priest scattered benefits on all 
And love was practised by the Equal of Heaven. 

Where the travellers went after this, you shall 
learn in our next. 



CHAPTER LXXXVIII. 

THREE PRINCES STUDY RELIGION 

The Pilgrims arrive at Yu Hwa and teach 
their religion. 

The three pilgrims each receive disciples. 

(The Three Princes. Pa,rtL) 

The Master, much pleased with the events at Feng 

Shan^- rode on his way, and arrived at a religious 

gathering at Yu Hwa, a most flourishing place, where 

rice was sold at four candareens per ten bushels, and oil 

for eight li (ten cash) per catty. B\'^ this time they had 

travelled eighteen thousand li from China, and had 

been fourteen years on the road. 

The true lUuatrious Keligion* is not human, 
The great Way, whose origin is in all space, 
Whose influence pervades the Universe, 
Has balm to heal all sufifering. 

The ruling sovereign of this place at first regarded 
the pilgrims as ordinary mortal travellers, but soon found 
they were immortals. The pilgrims showed their miracul- 
ous powers in wielding their magic weapons, one weigh- 
ing 13,000 catties, and the others weighing 5,048 catties 
each. When his three sons saw the magic power of the 
pilgrims, they begged to be taught how to wield such 
weapons. The disciples promised to instruct them. But 
the young princes found they had not sufficient strength 

•The Chinese name used here is the same as tliat used on the Nestorian 
monument ior Cliristianity.— Tr- 



310 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

to wield the pilgrims' heavy weapons. Sun told them 

they must acquire more power, and must first be taught 

HOW TO PRAY. He ordered the three 3'oung princes 

to go to a quiet room, where he drew the seven stars of 

the Great Bear on the floor, and made the princes kneel 

on them. He told them to close their eyes, concentrate 

their thoughts on some Scripture truth, and let the breath 

of Heaven enter their bodies, so that God's spirit might 

dwell in their heart. Aft«r praj^er, they would receive 

renewed power, being born again, their very bones being 

transformed, and they would become the sons of God. 

The princes then spent the whole night and day absorbed 

in a trance of new life. When they awoke and rose 

on their feet, they found themselves endowed with new 

strength. 

Three lighter magic weapons were made for the 

princes, to be always carried with them. But one evening 

a Yellow Lion Demon from a mountain, seventy li off, 

saw some strange lights shining in the sky, and 

discovered that they came from the weapons of the 

pilgrims. Knowing them to be precious, he stole them 

and thereby increased his power greatly. 

Right principles must never be yielded for a moment. 
If discarded, they cannot be living principle?, 
Even Divine weapons become useless, 
All religious forms are then in vain. 

How the pilgrims succeeded in getting back the 

Magic weapons you will find in our next. 



CHAPTER LXXXIX. 

FALSE VIEWS OF RELIGION 

The Yellow Lion Demon prepares a Banquet 
to celebrate the capture of vreapons. 

The three disciples raid the Demon cave, and 
regain the -wreapons. 

[outline. J 
(The Three Princes. Part II. ) 

Sun changed himself into the shape of a butt«i-fly, 
and flew to. the Demon's cave. There he heard a demon 
tell the others of the capture of the magic weapons, and 
they decided to hold a banquet to celebrate the event. 
On hearing this, Sun returned and told the others of the 
Demon's plans. Then the three disciples, transforming 
themselves into the shapes of the Demons sent to buy 
animals for the feast, gained entrance to the cave, where 
they found their weapons displayed. Changing back into 
their true forms, thej' seized their arms, and gave battle 
to the Demons. The chief of them, the Yellow Lion 
Demon, escaped, but the others were slain and the cave 
was set on fire. The disciples, bearing their weapons, 
returned in triumph to the city, and related to the ruler 
and the Master what had taken place. 

Meanwhile the Yellow Lion Demon fled to a certain 
Nine-headed Demon, whom he had in^ated to attend the 
feast, and begged his aid against the pilgrims. 

What happened to the pilgrims after this, you will 
learn from the next chapter. 



CHAPTER XC. 

ATTACKS OF A NINE-HEADED DEMON 

The Yellow Lion Demon leads an army. 
Keligious power is finally victorious. 

[outline.] 

This chapter relates the terrible struggles between 
the Pilgrim party and the Nine- headed Demon. It seemed 
to the Pilgrims, more than once, a hopeless task to 
conquer him and the Lion Demon. 

But Sun in this extremity appealed to the chief of 
the Taoist gods, as this Nine-headed Demon was under 
his Jurisdiction, and in this waj' they were finallj' 
saved. 

The guardian of the Demon in Heaven confessed 
that he had once become drunk, during which time the 
Demon escaped down to earth, and it was then that he 
almost ended the life of the Master. 

Safe at last in Buddha's land 
Ou they march to God's abode. 

How they reached the Spiritual Mountain, you shall 
hear later. 



CHAPTER XCI. 

FEAST OF LANTERNS AND NEW DANGER 

The Feast of Lanterns at Kin Ping fu. 
The Master carried avray to a Demon cave. 

[outline.] 
(The Oil Outrage. Part I.) 
After they had travelled five or six daj's from Yu 
Hwa city, the pilgrims arrived at a flourishing city called 
Kin Ping fu, a dependency of India, and stayed at the 
Merciful Cloud temple (Tsz Yun Sze). This was on the 
13th of the 1st moon. They were pressed to stay over 
the Feast of Lanterns on the 15th. The Pilgrims had 
lost their reckoning of days and months and were glad to 
start afresh. The lanterns were very brilliant with silk 
gauze and horn, and were to burn for three nights only. 
Only the best quality of oil was provided and the expense 
was enormous, amounting to Tls. 48,000. Buddha was to 
appear the last night, and on his appearance all the lamps 
would go out before the brightness of Buddha himself, 
and all the people would disappear in honour of his 
presence. But the Master, having come all the way from 
China to see Buddha, determined he would stay and 
worship Buddha there in the street. Sun, the Practical, 
looked on, and declared it was all a false deception. At 
this moment, a great wind arose and carried away all the 
oil, and the Master was whirled away to the Blue Dragon 
mountain, where Demons had lived in a cave for 1,000 
years. 



314 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

When the pilgrims discovered where their Master was 
hidden, the}^ attacked the Demons, demanding the Mas- 
ter's hberty, and fought a hundred and fifty pitched 
battles, but were not successful. Thej' returned to the 
temple, and related their failure to the priests. After 
consultation, they decided to go again and attack the de- 
mons in the night, lest it should be too late if they waited 
till the morning. 

"Whether they were victorious or not this time, you 
shall know in our next. 



CHAPTER XCII. 

SUN GOES TO HEAVEN FOR HELP 

The three pilgrims fight on the Blue Dragon 
Mountain. 

The four star Generals capture the Rhinoceros 
Demons. 

[ODTLLNE.J 

(The Oil Outrage. Part II. ) 

The disciples hastened to save their Master. Sun 
changed himself into a fly and having got in, found his 
Master, and unbound him whilst all the Demons were 
asleep. But on their way out, owing to some accident, 
all were aroused and the Master was retaken, and again 
bound. Pa Kiel and Sa Seng were also taken and 
bound. 

In this extremity , Sun decided to go to Heaven and 
seek celestial soldiers to help him. First he went back 
to the temple, and told the priests what had befallen him 
and that he was going to Heaven to ask for help. At 
this they were astonished, and asked. " How can you 
go to Heaven?" He replied, " There is no difficulty 
about that, for Heaven is my old home." With this he 
whistled, and was transported to the West gate of Heaven 
at once. There he met his old friend the angel of the 
Planet Venus, and one of the guardian kings, and the 
four^ great Angels, and having told his story, saw the 
Supreme Ruler, who promised to aid him with celestial 



316 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

soldiers. These were legions under four star generals, 
who were ordered to help. 

They accompanied Sun, and subdued the Demons, 
who changed into rhinoceros form. Finallj^, the officials 
and gentry were told that they would never be imposed 
on again by these Demons, nor forced to contibute this 
expensive oil, which, owing to the credulity of the people, 
was only used by the demons themselves. The officials 
and gentry were most grateful for the deliverance, and 
built a temple to commemorate the victory of the four 
star Generals over the Demons, and erected a memorial 
temple to the four Pilgrims. 

What happened later, j^ou will hear in our next. 



CHAPTER XCni. 

A WITCH IMPERSONATES A PRINCESS. 

A talk at Ki Ku Park, 

A King of India is given a son-in-law. 

[OUTLINK.] 

(The False Princess. Part I.) 

On the Pilgrims went, till they came to the Shie 
Wei country, to the Golden Temple where Shakyamuni 
had formerly preached. There they were hospitably 
received by the abbot, who said grace before eating. 
Attached to the temple was an orphanage. There they 
met a priest 105 years old, who told them, privately, that 
the King's daughter was in the orphanage. She declared 
she had been carried off and placed in this temple by the 
Demons, whilst a witch had been substituted as the royal 
Princess in the Palace. He bagged them to find out 
the truth of this, as every night the true Princess begged 
him to help her. The pilgrims promised to do what 
they could. 

On entering the city in search of the King's palace, 
to get his passport signed, the Master and Sun found a 
strange ceremony taking place. The King's only 
daughter had fixed on that very day and hour to throw a 
coloured silk ball on the head of her chosen husband. She 
threw it at the Master, and carried him to the palace, amid 
the congratulations of all the people. But the Master 
said he was on an important Mission, and must consult 



318 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

his three disciples, as to what was to be done. He was 
warned that if he did not accept the Princess' choice, he 
would he killed, This threw the Master into a great fear, 
and he waited anxiously for the a]jpearance of his 
disciples, for whom he had sent. 

AVhat happened when the Master saw the King, you 
shall hear in our next. 



CHAPTER XCIV. 

THE FALSE PRINCESS IN FEAR. 

The four pilgrrims in the Palace Park. 
The "Witch's joy is marred by fear 

(outline.) 

(The False Princess. Part II.) 

The three disciples were invited to the royal palace. 
On entering the royal presence, the three stood upright, 
and none of them knelt. The King asked them their 
names, and business. At this, the three moved nearer 
the king to speak, but the guard sternly rebuked them 
for their rudeness in approaching so near. Sun smiled, 
and cried out with a loud voice, "Those who insult others 
insult themselves. Since my Master is to be your son- 
in-law, how is it that he is standing and not sitting in 
your presence? I have never heard of such manners 
before." At this the king changed his countenance, but 
submitted to the rebuke. 

Then the chief disciple spoke: — 

"My surname is Sun, and my ancestors lived in the 
Eastern Flourishing continent, in the Ao Lai country, in 
the Flower and Fruit mountain. My father was Heaven 
and my mother was Earth ; a peach stone split and I was 
born. I sought for a famous man to be my teacher, and 
studied the best religion. Then I studied the magic of 
the immortals, and gatliered happiness at Tung Tien 
(Heaven's Blessed Cave) . I went to sea and conquered 



320 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

the dragons, went to the mountains and captured the 
Demons, erased my name from among mortals in Hades, 
and was registered with the immortals. Officials acknow- 
ledged me as the Great Holy One, the Equal of Heaven. 
I met the angels of heaven daily, aiad we sang together 
in the most Sacred places in daily gladness. But, because 
I spoilt the peach banquet, and greatly disturbed the 
Heavenly Court, I was arrested and subdued by Buddha, 
and imprisoned under Nature's mountain. When hun- 
gry, I had only iron rust to eat, and when thirsty I was 
given only copper syrup to drink. For 500 years I never 
tasted tea or food. Happily, when my Master came from 
the East to go to the West, Kwanj'in taught me how to 
avert the punishment of Heaven by repentance, and 
rescued me from my terrible distress. I was named the 
Seeker after Truth, and the Practical One." 

The king was greatly astonished, then came down 
from his throne and congratulated the Master, rejoicing 
in the great Providence which had brought them together. 

The second disciple then spoke: — 

"My name is Chu (Pig) . In a former life, 1 was a 
man fond of pleasure and idlenesSj and I was stupid all 
my life. But I met a Taoist Saint and after a few words 
from him, my mind was aroused, and I was awakened 
and decided to follow him. After studying for 16 years, 
I acquired about nine arts, and was able to mount on 
the clouds, and enter the Celestial Palace. There I was 
fortunate enough, by the grace of the Pearly Sovereign 
(Taoist chief god), to be appointed the General of the 
Celestial fairies, and had control of the River legions. 
I was most happy in heaven. But because, during a 



THE FALSE PRINCESS IN FEAR 321 

peach banquet, I became drunk, and played with the 
fairies, I lost my official position, and was condemned to 
be reborn on earth. By mistake I entered the womb of 
a sow instead of a woman, and that is how I have the 
snout and ears of a pig. I lived at Fu Ling Shan full 
of all kinds of mischief. Then I met Kwanyin who 
showed me the way to virtue, by following the Buddhist 
Faith, and escorting the Master from the East, who was 
on his way to fetch the Sacred Scriptures from the Western 
Heavens. My name is Seeker of Strength, and also the 
Keeper of Eight Commandments (Pa Kiei)." 

The King was much astonished on hearing this, and 
then asked the third disciple why he followed Buddha. 

He replied:-?— 

"My name is Sa (Sand), and I was originally a 
mortal man. But, because I desired to avoid the 
transmigration of souls, 1 searched high and low, far 
and wide, for. a way of deliverance. I carried my 
begging bowl with me, and practised daily austerities 
at my home, and was very humble. I was reckoned 
among the saints, and learnt spiritual arts for some 3,000 
years. I understood the four great forces of nature, 
and at last succeeded in entering the Celestial world, 
where I had audience with God. I was made the great 
Greneral of the Pages in attendance on the Celestial 
carriages. But, because I accidentally broke the glass 
dishes at the Pea,ch banquet, I was banished to the 
Quicksands River, where I did great damage to life. 

Happily, Kwanyin exhorted me to repent, and 
follow the Master to the West, and in this way bring forth 
good fruit. I understand religion much better now, and 



322 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

am named the Seeker after Purity, aud Sa Ho Shang." 

When the King heard this, he was very glad, 
because his own daughter had chosen a living Buddha, 
and also very much alarmed, because all three disciples 
were strange spirits. Then an official came to announce 
to the King that the propitious day for the marriage was 
the 12th, and so it was fixed for that day. 

As it was only the 8th, the King provided daily 
feasts for the son-in-law, and the disciples. But the 
Master became very much annoyed with Sun, and said, 
' ' You always bring me into trouble. If you had not taken 
me to see the throwing of the silk ball, this present dif- 
ficulty would never have occurred. "What am I to do?" 

Now the demon bride began to fear what Sun might 
do to her, so, on the night before the wedding, she begged 
her father to sign the passport of the Master, and let the 
disciples leave before daylight, and proceed to fetch the 
Scriptures while the Master remained with the King. 
She said she feared to see the frightful faces of his 
disciples. And so it was arranged that they should go 
before daylight. 

The Master was greatly alarmed at this. But Sun, 
plucking a hair, made a false Sun and let that one pvoceed 
with the other two disciples, whilst he himself remained 
to watch over his Master. At night he flew, as a bee, to 
his Master's side, "Do not be alarmed, I am with you! " 

How the Master escaped from the King's palace, you 
shall hear in our next. 



CHAPTER XCV. 

SUN KESTORES THE TRUE PRINCESS 

The -witch revenges herself on the fairy 
rahbit. 

The true Princess regains her original state. 
[outline.] 
(The False Princess. Part III. ) 

When the Princess appeared the next day for her 
marriage, Sun at once recognised her as a witch, and 
attacked her in the midst of the court. She in turn 
appeared in her true form, threw away all her royal 
garments and jewels, and took up a club, and fought with 
Sun in the air. She fled away, and he followed her, till 
she disappeared in a cave in Mao Ying Shan. But he 
found her in one of the caves and fought her again, and 
was pressing her hard, when Tai, the angel of the Yin 
Star, appeared, and begged Sun to spare her life for his 
sake. He then related the story of the true princess. 
She had been a rabbit fairy in one of the heavenly 
mansions twenty years before, and had boxed the ears of 
one of her companions. After this, to save herself from 
revenge, she decided to go down to earth, and entered the 
womb of a Queen. The insulted fairy had never for- 
gotten her treatment, and a year before had carried her 
enemy off in the wind, and taken her place in the palace. 

When the King discovered that the false Princess 
was a witch, he wished to know where his true daughter 



324 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

was. Sun told him that she was at the Golden orphanage. 
The King and Queen went and fetched her and the 
temple was rebuilt at the royal expense. To reward the 
old abbot for his care of the Princess, the King com- 
manded that the successive abbots of that temple should 
be specially honoured. 

Sun said to the king, "I have another matter to 
infp.rxa your Majesty. This mountain is called the 
Centipede mountain (Wu Kung) and they say that many 
people suffer annually from these pests. The greatest 
enemies of these centipedes are cocks." The King 
o;rdered a thousand cocks to be sent to the mountain to 
devour all the centipedes. 

After great favours a wave of gratitude fills the soul, 
When one has left the ocean of matter, one seeks the spj[^it. 

How they fared on the rest of their journey, yftu 
v^ill hear in our next. 



CHAPTER XCVI. 

GREAT HOSPITALITY TO THE PILGRIMS 

The robbers gladly -wait upon the great 
priests. 

The Master refuses all re-ward. 

[outline.] 
(Great Hospitality. Parti.) 

Form, form, form, yet there is no form. 

Vain, Tain, vain, yet there is no vanity 

Loud wrangling and silent thought are alike in vain 

Why trouble to speak in your dreams? 

In usefulness there is uselessness, 

In no merit there is merit. 

Like change of colour in ripening fruit. 

Do not ask how this can be. 

It was now the beginning of summer, as the 

pilgrims proceeded on their journey. They arrived at 

Tung Tai Fu, and were most hospitably entertained by 

a good family, who had vowed, twenty-four years before, 

to aid ten thousand priests. The chief was now 64 years 

old and had already helped 9996, By helping the four 

who had just come, he would now be able to complete 

his vow. His wife and two sous were also most kind 

and attentive, and would not let the pilgrims leave in a 

hurry. They said, "Why not stay a year with us?" 

Twenty-four priests were invited to hold a three days' 

service, and dine with them. The day before they left, 

a large mumber of neighbours were also invited, and 

they were treated most royally during the whole 



826 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

fortnight of their stay. On leaving, they were offered 
money for their expenses, but this the Master refused. 
They had scarcely started before a great rain fell and 
they had poor shelter in an old ruin through the whole 
night. Alas ! After joy there came sorrow. 

How they fared at daylight you shall hear in our 
next. 



CHAPTER XCVII. 

SUN GOES TO HADES FOR HIS HOST 

The kind Iiost falls into robbers' hands. 
The Sage goes to Hades for his deliverance. 

[outline, j 

(Great Hospitality. Part II.) 

Seeing the lavish reception given to the pilgrims 
that night, some robbers decided that the host must be 
the wealthiest in the city. They therefore took advantage 
of the dark night and rain, burnt his house, robbed him 
of his treasure and killed him. 

Next day the injured family of the rich man falsely 
charged the pilgrims of robbing and killing, and a band 
of five hundred and fifty soldiers was sent after them for 
their money. Meanwhile the robbers had got their booty 
outside the city and divided it. But, seeing the pilgrims 
coming on they said, "These were well treated, and must 
have money on them ; let us rob them also ! ' ' Sun used 
his magic skill and, delivering his company, got the 
robbers' booty, which he decided to return to his former 
kind host. On their way back to the city, they met the 
Yamen runners who, seeing the booty, took for granted 
that the pilgrims had been the robbers, and carried 
them to prison, where they were badly beaten. 

Sun, however, once more went to Hades, to restore 
the soul of his friend to earth again, and succeeded in 



328 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

getting his life prolonged for 12 years more. The 
pilgrims were then set at liberty, and went on their way. 

The earth is broad ; good and evil are acting both at once. 
Heaven is high, and does not always shelter the good. 
Far away and safe is God's way. 
And leads to the Spiritual Mountain in the Blessed Land 

How they succeeded at last iii sfeeing God, you will 
know in our next. 



CHAPTER XCVIII. 
THE MORTAL BODY CAST ASIDE 

■When man is perfected, and passion tamed, the 
body is cast aside. 

■When all one's longings are satisfied, then one 
sees God, (the True Model, Chin Ju). 

After solving the mystery of the robbery, the 
Pilgrims went ou their way, and found the country 
most beautiful, like the land of the gods ; every family 
followed virtue, and students studied religion in the 
woods. In about a week, they saw, in front of them, a 
building several stories high, even a hundred feet, the 
top of which reached the stars. At this the Master 
said to the Monkey, ' ' This is a fine country. " " Truly 
it is," answered Sun. "But when travelling through 
other countries, you wished to dismount, and worship 
each poor representation of Buddha; now that you are 
in the real country with true Buddhas, how is it you do 
not dismount and worship ? " At this the Master felt 
rebuked and jumped off his horse. Thej' then reached 
the gate of the high building, where a fine student 
ieaiied on the gate, and called out to some one, " Is this 
not the Royal Ambassador from the East in search of 
the Holy Scriptures ? ' ' The Master quickly raised his 
head, and saw an Immortal of surpassing loveliness. 
He was robed in fine garments, and had a dust brush in 
his hand, straw sandals on his feet, and a Taoist charm 



330 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

on his arm. He had been a handsome Taoist priest of 

extreme beauty, wlio had cultivated long life by living 

in beautiful surroundings, in order to enjoy eternal life, 

free from earthly sorrow. The Master did not know 

that he was a Taoist Angel sent from the Golden 

Thunder Hall to welcome him. But the Monkey knew, 

and called out, " Master, this is the greatest Angel of 

the Taoist temple at the foot of the Spiritual Mountain 

come to welcome us." It was only then that the 

Master understood, and went forward to bow to him. 

The great Angel smiled and said, "You, holy Priest, 

have only arrived this year. I was misled by Kwanyin, 

who informed me ten years ago, that she had received 

Buddha's command to go to the East and find a man, 

who should come to Heaven and fetch the Scriptures. 

I therefore expected you would have arrived in two or 

three years. I have been waiting for you every year, 

but have never received any news till now." The 

Master put his palms together and said, " Many thanks 

for all and the kind thought of your Celestial Highness." 

Then the four pilgrims, their horse and baggag6, were 

taken into the mansion, and each of the disciples was 

introduced to the great Angel. Tea and refreshments 

were ordered for them, and a small priest w-as ordered 

to prepare a fragrant bath for the pilgrims, before they 

ascended the Mountain. 

When your work is done, then cleanse yourself. 
Train your spirit in harmony with nature, 
Then you may disregard all troubles. 

By seeking the three refuges, and the nine commandments, 
you begin a new life. 



THE MORTAL BODY CAST ASIDE 331 

When the Demons are conquered, then you reach the land of 
Buddha. 

When struggles cease, you can join the happy Shamans, 

All impurity is washed away, 

And you attain the original perfection and incorruptibility. 

When the pilgrims had finished their bath, it was 
evening, and they rested in the Taoist Yu Chin mansion. 
Next morning the Master changed his clothes, put on 
his beautiful cassock, and his biretta, and took in 
his hand the silver staff. He then entered the hall, 
and there made obeisance to the great Angel, who 
said, " Let me show you the way." Practical Sun said, 
"I know the way. We must not trouble you." The 
Angel replied, " You know the way through the air, but 
you have never trodden this way on foot. Your Master 
has not yet travelled by the clouds, and therefore you 
should follow the road." Sun the Practical said, 
" What you say is true, kindly show us the way. My 
Master desires with all his heart to see Buddha. Have 
no doubt about that." The great Angel smiled, took 
the hand of the Master and led him on, burning sandal- 
wood incense " By this way one does not go outside the 
Mansion gate, but through the central hall and out at 
the back gate." 

The great Angel pointed to the Spiritual Mountain 
(Ling Shan) , and said, " Your Reverence, half way up 
the sky you see beautiful light of all colours shining 
forth in a thousand rays. That is the top of the 
Spiritual Mountain where Buddha dwells." At this 
sight the Master was going to worship. But Sun 
laughed and said, '* Master, you have not yet arrived at 
the place of worship. The place to dismount and 



332 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

worship is still some distance off. If you begin to 
kowtow now, you will have too many obeisances to 
make." The great Angel then said, "Holy Priest and 
you three disciples, the Great Holy One, the Celestial 
Fairy Chief (see chap. 94), and the Celestial Chief of 
Pages (see chap. 94) have now arrived at the Blessed 
Land and can see the Spiritual Mountain. I shall now 
r'eturn." The Master bade him farewell. 

The Great Holy One led the Pilgrim party, and they 
ascended gradually. Not more than two miles distant, 
they saw a stream of living water rolling down with 
high waves. It was about three miles wide, with no 
sign of roads anywhere leading to it. The Master was 
surprised and said to the Seeker, ' ' The Great Saint must 
have shown us the wrong way by mistake. This watei? 
is so wide and strong, and I see no ferry boats, how can 
we get across it ? " The Practical One smiled, and said, 
"No, the Angel made no mistake. Do j'ou not see 
there is a great bridge? We must cross the river \)y that 
bridge." When the Master and his disciples came 
near it, there was a tablet on the bridge with these 
words ' Cloud, Ferry.' (Ling yun Tu). 

It was a single tree across the river. 

From afar is was like a beam across the sky, 
Near by, it seemed a rotten broken tree trunk. 
It was narrow and slippery and dizzy to cross; 
By this the gods trod over the brilliant clouds. 

The Master was frightened and said, " This bridge, 
iis not for mortals to cross over. We must look for some 
rithter way." Sun smiled, and said, "It is the right 
■^ay." Pa Kiei said, "If it is the waj', who dares to 



THE MORTAL BODY CAST ASIDE 333 

cross it? The river is broad and the waves are high, and 
there is only this single tree, both narrow and slippery, 
spanning it. Who will attempt to cross it?" Practical 
Sun said, " If you all wait here, I will show you how to 
cross it." At this he ran and jumped on the bridge, 
crossed it jauntily, and in a miuute was over it. Then he 
called on the others to follow. The Master shook his 
head, Pa Kiel and Sa Stog bit their nails, and said, " It 
is far too difficult ! " At this Practical Sun ran back ov^r 
the bridge and, taking hold of Pa Kiei's hand, dragged 
him towards it, saying ' ' Stupid fool, follow me ! " But 
Pa Kiel rolled on the ground and said, "Forgive me, it 
is far too dangerous. Let me mount on the wind and 
cross over." Practical Sun urged him, "This is not 
the place for you to mount the wind. To become a 
Buddha you must cross by this bridge." Pa Kiei said, 
" Brother, if I cannot become a Buddha without this,^ 
I will renounce my hopes. It is really impossible to pass 
over it." 

While these two were wrangling at the bridge end, 
they saw a man floating down in a boat crying out, 
'•'. Take the ferry boat, take the ferry boat." The Master 
was overjoyed at this, and called out to his disciples, " Do 
not wrangle any more, there is a ferryman coming." 
When he came near, they saw he had only a raft. Sun 
was not dismayed at the raft, but called to the boatman 
to. come closer. In a twinkling the raft was alongside 
the shore. At the sight, the Master was frightened and 
ga,id, " How can such a broken raft take us over?" 

The Pilot, who was none other than the Founde;r of 
of Buddhism, said : — 



334 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

" My boat since chaos famous is, 
Unchanged it is from first to last. 
Spite wind and waves, still firm it is, 
Ever safe, without beginning or end. 
Passions never infect it, they submit to One, 
Through countless troubles it moves firmly on, 
Though a wealv raft, yet it can cross an ocean 
It has safely ferried innumerable souls." 

The Great Holy One united his palms, thanked him 
and said, " I am deeply grateful to you for your thought- 
fulness in coming to meet my Master. Master, get into 
the boat! Although it has a leaky bottom, it is steady, 
and no wind or waves can upset it. ' ' The Master was 
still afraid and doubtful. Sun the Practical pushed him, 
and the Master lost his footing, and fell into the water. 
But the Pilot at onee rescued him, and stood him on the 
boat. The Master wrung his clothes, blaming Sun. 
Then the Practical One helped Sa S^ng on, while Pa Kiei 
led the horse, and carried the baggage also, on to the raft. 

The Pilot then gently guided the raft across. They 
saw a dead body floating. At sight of this, the Master 
was greatly frightened. But Sun smiled and said, 
' ' Master do not be alarmed ! That corpse is none other 
than your own." Pa Kiei also said, "It is you, it is 
you! " Sa SSng clapped his hands, and also said, " It is 
you, it is you!" The Pilot also remarked, "It was 
yours, I congratulate you." The three Pilgrims con- 
gratulated him, and thej' quietly crossed over the Cloud 
Ferry in safety. The Master's shape was changed, and 
he jumped ashore on the ether side with a very light 
body. 



THE MORTAL BODY CAST ASIDE 335 

When casting off the flesh and bones of the mortal body, 
The permanent soul is loath to depart, 
Now that the work is finished and it is become Divine, 
All the past impurities of passions are washed away. 
To reach the other shore of eternity is called the greatest and 
widest wisdom. 

When the four pilgrims looked round, the raft had 
disappeared. Sun the Practical told them that this Pilot 
was Fo Tsu, the Buddhist founder of Religion welcoming 
them to Paradise. It was now that the Master under- 
stood. Then he quickly turned round and thanked his 
disciples. Sun replied, " Let neither of us thank each 
other, for we all helped one another. Thanks to our 
Master, we were saved by joining religion. Happily we 
have succeeded in bearing good fruit, and we were able to 
defend our Master and persevered , till he was able to cast 
off the mortal body. Master, look at this wonderful land 
of beauty, of forest, of flowers and birds ! How vastlj' 
superior to the old world!" The Pilgrims could not 
cease rejoicing. With light and strong bodies they 
marched up the Spiritual Mountain, and soon saw the 
Lei- Yin Temple, the Central Temple of Julai. 

Its roof touched the clouds. 

Its foundation was on Shuni Mountain, 

It stood amidst high peaks and wondrous rocks, 

O'erhanging precipices and deep valleys. 

Adorned with grasses and flowers, 

With winding paths and fragrant air. 

The roofs dove-tailed with golden tiles, 

The walls built up of coloured agate, 

With carved pillars without number. 

The many mansions bloomed with flowers. 

And high palaces were innumerable. 

The roof of the palace of the King of Heaven 



336 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Shone forth with rainbow light. 

In front of the sacred Hall burning flames came forth. 

The Buddha shrine was visible. 

Rarest flowers gave forth their perfumes 

Beyond compare of the best on earth. 

There was eternal day among the clouds, 

The lightest dust did not reach there, 

Such was the Purest Land, 

No trouble came nigh the great Hall. 
The Pilgrims climbed leisurely to the top of the 
mountain, and there they saw green forests of pine and 
other trees, where were gathered the saints. The Master 
bowed to them. The groups of saints, men and women 
disciples, were embarrassed, put the palms of their hands 
together and said, " Holy Priest, do not bow to us until 
you have seen Shakyamuni. After that we can talk." 
Sun smiled and said, " It is too soon for this. Let us go 
and worship the Superior first." 

The Master gladly hurried up after Sun till they 
reached the door of the Lei Yin Temple. There were two 
great Cherubim who met them, and said, " Holy Priest 
welcome ! you have arrived at last ! " The Master bowed, 
and said, " Yes, your disciple, Huen Chwang, has arrivr 
ed," and was about to enter. But the Cherubim said, 
" Holy Priest, please wait until we have announced you, 
and then you can go in." One of the doorkeepers went 
round a corner, and announced him to the four great 
Cherubim at the inner door, and they at the second gate 
announced' him to those at the third door. Inside the 
third door there was a religious function. So they 
hurried on to the Great Hero Hall, and announced the 
Master to Julai, the most honourable Shakyamuni, say- 
ing, " The Chinese Priest who comes to get the Scriptures 



THE MORTAL BODY CAST ASIDE 337 

has arrived." The Founder of Buddhism was much 

pleased and assembled: — 

The eight Buddhisatvas, 
four Cherubim, 
five hundred Lohans, 
three thousaud Giete (Choristers?) 
eleven great Seraphim 
eighteen Kia Laii. 

These were arranged in two rows and then He invit- 
ed the Chinese Priest to come in. The Chinese Priest 
entered, followed in order by Wu Kung, Wu Neng and 
Wu Tsing, leading the horse, and carrying the load of 



They had travelled 10,000 li, and crossed a thousand 
rivers, in the daily hope of seeing Buddha at last. Thig 
day they were to see Julai. It was the day of their 
lives. 

When the four were in front of the Great Hero Hall, 
they fell on their faces and worshipped Julai, and then 
they worshipped the two on his right and left, each three 
times. After kneeling before Buddha for a long time 
the Master presented their credentials and passports to 
Him. 

After looking them through, Julai returned them to 
the Chinese Ambassador. The Master made a profound 
bow and said, " Your disciple, Huen Chwang, appointed 
by the Chinese Emperor of the Tang dynasty, has come 
from afar to your Holj Mountain to humbly beg for 
Sacred Scriptures to save all men. I hope the Founder 
of Buddhism will be gracious, so that I may soon return 
to my country." Julai opened his lips and, with great 
kindness of heart, spoke to the Master: — 



338 :mission to heaven 

"You in the East belong to the continent of Nan 
Chen Pu Chow. The heaven is high, and the earth is. 
thick, products are extensive and men numerous. But 
most of them are covetous and cruel, licentious and wild, 
insulting and deceitful. They do not respect the Budd- 
hist Religion and do not seek goodness, thej' do not re- 
verence the sun, moon and stars, and do not value 
agriculture. They are neither loyal nor filial, neither 
just nor kind. Their hearts are full of deceit, using big 
bushels with which to buj', and small weights to sell. 
They delight in cruel, destructive deeds, and gather for 
themselves a harvest of trouble in hell, Avhere the}' suffer 
manj' poundings and grindings of affliction before they 
are clianged into animals. Then they will suffer much 
from horny creatures in payment of their sins. Their 
flesh will feed men. They are lost for ever into the lowest 
hell without hope of deliverance, on account of their 
wickedness. 

'Although they have had Confucius in their conr 
tinent, who established the teaching of benevolence, 
righteousness, propriety and knowledge, and have had a 
succession of Rulers, who have ordered the punishments 
of banishment, of strangulation, and of beheading, they 
are still foolish. 

'Now I have three kinds of sacred books by which 
men can be delivered from their troubles and by which 
an end can be put to their sins. Of these three kinds of 
sacred books, one deals Avith the laws of Heaven: the 
second discourses of Earth ; and the third is Sacred 
Scripture to save lost souls. In all, they number 35 
"works and 15,144 books, and are all sacred in that they 



THE MORTAL BODY CAST ASIDE 339 

show men how to be upright aiul good. 

'All the knowledge of the four great continents, of the 
Heavens, and the earth, of the races of men, of birds, and 
beasts, of flowers, of forestry and manufactures are com- 
plete in them. Since you liave come a long distance, I 
must give you a complete set to carry back. But your 
people are ignorant and gross, calumniating tlie ti-ue 
Scriptures and not understanding the deep meaning of 
our Shamans. Call my two chief disciples, Ananda and 
Kasj'apa. Let them lead these four travellers , first to the 
dining hall to dine, and then to the Library, and from 
each of the oo works select a few to take back with them 
to circulate in the East." 

Ananda and Kasyapa led them below, where they saw 
strange precious things in thousands. Gifts were provid- 
ed for each of the pilgrims, and a vegetable banquet 
spread before them. All- was of the very best, the choic- 
est food, the most delicate tea, the finest fruit of all 
kinds, different from anything on earth among men. 
The Master and disciples raised the dishes to their heads 
in thanks for Buddha's grace and then enjoyed them. 

Truly, there reigns golJen light as bright as day, 

All kinds of nameless sweet incense, 

Tlie eye meets a thousand trees in tlie Ijeautiful palace, 

And the sweetest music charms tlie ear far beyond all earthly 
strains. 

There tlie saints never grow old, 

Once partaking of celestial foo<l, they live for ever. 

All the sorrows of life are past. 

And now- eternal glory and joy are attained. 

It was great bliss to Pa Kiel and Sa Ho Shang to be 

at Buddha's palace, and enjoy to their hearts' content the 

banquet of immortals, who had cast off their mortal coils 



Mo MISSION TO HEA^TiN 

(bones and flesh and blood.) Ananda and Kasyapa 
honoured their guests with their presence. When their 
meal was over, the pilgrims were led to the Sacred 
Librarj-, where books were stored in cupboards and boxes 
all with red labels of their names. 

After the four had seen the list of books, Ananda 
and Kasyapa said, if they were going to pay for the 
volumes, they would be given them at once. The Master 
replied that he had not been prepared to pa}-, as he 
understood the Scriptures were to be presented to them. 
The two smiled and said, "If we give awaj' our Scriptures 
for nothing, we shall die of starvation." 

When Sun the Practical beard this, he said, "Then 
we shall go back and inform Julai, and ask him to give 
us the books Himself." At this the two said, "Do not 
be disturbed, come here and receive the Scriptures." 
Thus the Master and disciples received loads to be carried 
by the horse, and by Pa Kici and Sa Ho Shang, after 
which they went to thank Julai. On the waj' they 
passed an old Buddhist saint called Yen Teng (The 
Light-giving Buddha). He had overheard the conver- 
sation about Uie price of the books, and knew (hat they 
had been given 'Wordless Scripture.' He thought within 
himself, "Sun served them right! Still, since the people 
in the East are unintelligent they will not understand 
the inspiration of the 'Wordless Scriptures,' and as the 
Master has travelled far, let him have Written Scriptures, 
and be careful not to divulge their secret to everyone." 

He ordered the Pilgrims to be follow^ed, and when 
their loads were opened, the pilgrims were indignant to 
find that they had no Wiilten Scriptures, but only white 



THE MORTAL BODY CAST ASIDE 341 

paper. They decided to return and inform Julai that 
they had been cheated, because they had not offered to 
pay for the books. The Master offered Ananda and 
and Kasyapa the golden bowl, -which the Chinese Emperor 
and given him, in payment for the Written Scriptures. 
Kasyapa then went in and brought out the Written 
Scriptures to the Master, who ordered his disciples to 
examine each volume carefully and see that they were 
not white paper this time. The three treasures of 
Scripture numbered 5,048 works. These were loaded 
on the horse. The Master took the crosier in his hand, 
put on his biretta and cassock, and went, with great joy, 
to thank Julai. 

The Great Scripture is joyful reading, 

It is a rare gift of God, 

It is full of priceless pearls. 

One word cannot be bought for ten thousand coins. 

TVho can read the Wordless Scripture of Ananda? 

The Scriptures of the Ancient of Days must not be lightly 
used, 

The common people should not desecrate them 

Believers will then understand this Boundless Law, 
Then Julai ascended and sat on the Lotus Throne, 
and ordered the two great Lo Han tamers of dragons and 
tigers to beat the cloud drums, and invite the 3,000 
Buddhas and Giete, the Cherubim (Kin Kang) and 
Boddhisatvas, the 500 Lohans, the 800 young saints from 
all quarters of the heavens in the Blessed Land of the 
Spiritual Mountain, together with all honoured ones and 
all the holy monks. They were seated all in their respective 
places. Then heavenly music commenced simultaneous- 
ly. When all the Buddhas had arrived, they worshipped 
Julai. Julai asked Ananda and Kasyapa how many 



U2 



MISSION TO HEAVEN 



Scriptures tliey had given. Then they imnounced the 
following: — 





Chinese 


Sanscrit Ab. of Provisional 




names 


names books Translations 


1. 


Nie Pan Kins 

mmm 


Nirvana Sulras 400 Tlic Eternal State 


2. 


Pu Sa King 


BodJhisattva Sutra 360 Saints 



3. nil Kung King 

4. Shin Leng Yen King Snrangama Sutra 30 Heroes? 

■w^ mm 

5. En I King ? 40 Grace? 

J^ IS' iPA 

6. Kue Ting King Vinirnita? 

7. Pao Tdang King Ratnagarbharddhi 20 Precious Treasury 



40 Tilings to come 



8. Hwa Ten King 



9. Li Chen Ju King 

10. Ta Pan Yo King Mahapragna- 
:k ^^- M: paramita 

11. TaKwang Ming King ? 

i^^ mm. 

12. Wei Tseng You King Adbhuta 

13. Wei Mo King Timalakirtti 



Ayatamsaka Sutraa 81 Devotional 

7 30 Tlie worship of God 



14. San Lun Pie King ? 

H ISr SI M 

15. King Kang King Vagrakkhedika 
4^ Wi ^ praguaparamita 1 



Highest wisdom 
600 about eternity. 

50 The highest light 
530 Miracles 
30 The sinless man 
42 Trinity? 

Diamond Sutra 



THE MOETAL BODY CAST ASIDE 



MZ 



16. Ohing I^ Lun King ? 20 Orthodoxy 

jE ^ t& ig 

17. Fo Pen Hhig King Buddhakaritra 116 Life of Buddha 



18. Wu Lung King ? 

SUM 

19. Pu Sa Kiei King Boddhisattva- 



20. Ta Chi King 

21. Mo Ho King 



karya-nirdSs'a 
Mahasaunipata 



20 The five Dragons 

Tlie Rule of the 
60 Saints 

Collection of 

30 llltistrations 
140 ? 



22. Fa Ewa King 

23. Yu Kia King Yoga Sutra 

24. Pao Chang King ? 
23. Shi Tien Lun King ? 

26. Seng Ki King Maha sangha- 

ff it M ^"»y* 

27. Fo Kwoh Cha King ? 



Saddharma Punda- The Lotus Gospel 

rlka Sutra 10 

30 Extatic meditation 



Precious Common 
170 Prayer 

.30 Paradise 

Sanghika school 
130 

1638 Miscellaneous 



28. Ki Siiin Lun King Mahayana- Awakening of 
^ !§• 1^ ^ Sraddliatpada 60 Faith 

29. Ta Chi Tu King Mahapragna Higher Buddhism 
Jt ^ JM. ^ paramita sastra 90 



30. Pao Wei King ? 

3L Pen Ko King ? 

32. Cheng Lu Wen King ? 

jE .# ^ M 

33. TaKungCho King Mahamayuri- 
:^ a ^ ^- vidyaradjni 



147 The majestic 

56 The Palace 

10 Standard Rulea 

The Peacock 
14 



344 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

34. Wei Sliih Lun King Vidyama- Mystic Mantras 

ae ^ t& i^C trasiddlii 10 



35. Ku Shie Lun King Abhidliarma-kosa Piiilosophy of kosa 

(a -§■ I& M ^as*^"-^ 1° 

Note. Those without Sanscrit names are not included in Nanjio's 
Catalogue of the Tripitaka. Can these be nou-Buddiiist Scriptures ? 

There were 35 works. 5,048 books were selected 
from them and given to the Holy !Monk from Cliina, 
for which he thanks Juki." Each of the four pilgrims 
then folded his palms together and bowed towards 
Julai. 

Julai spoke to the Master and said, "These Scriptures 
are priceless in value. Although they are Buddhist ca- 
nons, they really contain the essence of the three religions 
of China, (CJonfuciauism, Buddhism and Taoism) 
AVhen j'ou take them to your continent of Nan Chen Pu 
Chow for the instruction of all, be careful not to desecrate 
them. Do not read them till you have bathed and 
fasted from flesh. Reverence them as great treasures, 
for in them you find the rnj'^stery of how to become 
Divine, and you will receive wonderful light for the 
understanding of all things." The ^Master kowtowed iu 
thanksgiving, and received them all. 

When the Master had gone, Julai was about tb 
dismiss the assembled court, when suddenly Kwanyin 
entered, united her palms and spoke to the Founder of 
Buddhism, saying, " Some years ago I received your 
commands to go to the East and look for a man to fetch 
the Scriptures. To-day that work is accomplished. It 
has taken 14 years, which is 5,040 days, which is 
eight days less than the number of books in the three 



THE MORTAL BODY CAST ASIDE 345 

collections of Scripture. I beg that you authorise me to 
have these Scriptures sent to the East in eight days." 
Julai was greatly pleased at this, gave her an edict 
authorising this, and ordered the eight great Cherubim to 
have the Holj' Monk return to China with the Scriptures 
within eight days, so that the days might tally with the 
number of the books in the collection. On no account 
should there be any delay. The Cherubim then at once 
caught up the Master and said, "Scripture-Seekers, follow 
us." Then, feeling their bodies light and strong, they 
flew on the clouds following the Cherubim. 
When their hearts were pure, they saw God, 
When their work was finished, they flew on high. 

To know how the Scriptures were received in the 
East, you must read the next chapter. 



CHAPTER XCIX. 
THE LAST TRIAL 

The complete number of trials, nine times 
nine, comes to an end. 

The complete number of perfected virtues, 
three times three, is attained. 

Wtilgt the eight Cherubim escorted the Master 
on his return journey, the Angels of the five regions and 
other spirits went to Kwanj'in and said, "We were 
formerly commanded by you to give private protection to 
the Holy Messenger. Now that his work is accom- 
plished, we beg to be released from our duty." She said, 
"Certainly, but tell me how the Pilgrims behaved on the 
journey." They said, "They were most sincere and 
devoted. But the poor Master suffered countless troubles 
all the way. "We have written a complete list of them. 
They number 80 in all," 

Though the Guardian angels were many, 

Constant were the attacks from evil spirits. 

The Holy Monk travelled over a hundred and eight thousand li. 

It is difficult to record all his trials. 

Kwanyin looked at the list of trials and said, "It is 
not complete. To be perfect there should be 81 trials." 
She ordered the Angels to overtake the eight Cherubim, 
and tell them privately that they must let the Monk 
suffer one trial more. This the Angels did. 

After receiving this order from Kwanyin the 
Cherubim slackened down on the wings of the wind , and 



THE LAST TRIAL 847 

gradually descended to the ground, wliere they left the 
pilgrims. 

To attain perfection in religion is not easy. 

A firm will is net<ded to penetrate the Divine mysterioa. 

One must often fight and overcome devils. 

Before one can reacli the end. 

One must toil and encounter many sorrows, 

And not make superficial study of books. 

But regard them as do the Taoists the book Chan Tung Ki. 

If one errs by a hair's breadth, one cannot attaint to truth. 

It was a strange sensation for the pilgrims to be on 
the ground again. They had come down near some 
water. The Master asked, "Can any one tell me where 
we are?" Sun said, "Master, this is the mouth of the 
Milky Way River (see Chaps. 47-49)." The river was 
wide. It was also a lonely place, without houses or boats, 
and they were on the Western side. How could they get 
across? Two of them suggsted that since the Master had 
left his mortal body behind, they could cross the river 
by magic. But Sun said, "No, it cannot be done." 
He knew that there was one trial more to undergo, and 
it was for this that thej' had stopped on the way. Then 
they heard a cry, "Chinese priest, come this way." 
They went, and found that it was the white tortoise, who 
had ferried them over as they went West, at the time 
when thej'^ had. saved a family at Chen Kia Chwang. 
The tortoise said he had been waiting for their return 
for a long time, and was glad to see them. Sun, the 
Practical, said, "Formerly we had to trouble you. Now 
we meet again." At this the four, pilgrims were very 
rejoiced to see the tortoise. He took them and the horse 
all on his back, and swam across to the other side. 
Tfie one way of salvation is full of mystery. 



348 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

All evil spirits distinguish between Divine and human. 

They know when the perfect man appears. 

And the stages by which perfection is attained 

They know the three ways of the Mahayana Faith 

They know the nine ways of perfection, 

There is no need of talking about carrying over by magic. 

As tliey neared the Eastern shore and it was getting 
dark, the tortoise said, " Master, when you went West 
I asked you to enquire of Buddha for me how I might 
return to my former state, and when I might get a 
human body. Did you remember to ask ? ' ' But the 
Master had been so absorbed in his own affairs, that he 
had completely forgotten the tortoise and his request 
and so he had nothing to say. The tortoise, finding 
that he had been forgotten, turned a somersault and 
threw all and everj-thing into the river. Happily the 
mortal body of the blaster had been exchanged for an 
immortal one, and therefore he was safe in the water. 
Pa Kiel and Sa Seng were also at home in the water, 
but the books were all soaked. 

Suddenly a great sandstorm arose, the sky grew 
dark and there was thunder and lightning. The 
Master was so alarmed that he put weights on the books 
lest they should be blown away. Sun brandished his 
club, for he knew that the storm had been caused 
by an evil spirit who wanted to rob the Master of the 
books. They fought the whole night till dawn. Theii 
the Master in his wet clothes and in great fear said to 
Sun, "What can be the meaning of this ti-ial?" Sun 
blurted out, " Master, you know it is my duty to 
protect you. To get these Scriptures is to rob human 
nature of its forces by which men can be made to last 



THE LAST TRIAL 349 

as long as Heaven, and earth, and be as bright as the 
sun and moon, living in eternal youth, -with an in- 
corruptible body. On this account all the evil spirits 
are jealous, and wish to rob men of these Scriptures. 
First, thej' made the books wet, and now, they have 
succeeded in bringing your spiritual body down to earth 
again, it was uecessarj' that your perfect powers should 
be brought to test for your protection." 

When the sun rose, the books and other effects were 
spread out to dry. Soon the people of Chen Kia Chwang 
found the pilgrims and, full of gratitude for what had 
been done for them on the way West, insisted on their 
going to their village to see their new temple. There 
thej' found images of the four set up, and the whole 
village most prosperous. Sun said thej' should worship 
God, for all was owing to His grace. The Pilgrims were 
prevailed on to rest for the night. 

Before daylight, however, the Master called his 
comrades up and said, " AVe must not yield to more 
invitations to stay. Let us start quietly at once." 
When they got oi;tside, thej'' heard the eight Cherubim 
in the sky calling out, " Travellers, follow us!" They 
felt the air full of sweet fragrance, and mounting the 
wind, flew on tlieir way. 

How the}' were received bj' the Chinese Emperor, 
you shall hear in our next. 



CHAPTER C. 
THE PILGEIMS FINISHED WORK 
The return to Cliina. 
The five holy ones are canonized. 

[outline.] 

At the second drive of the wind, the Cherubim 
brought the four travellers in one day within sight of 
Sianfu. There they saw the Library built b}' the 
Emperor for the receptioii of the Scriptures. This had 
been erected three years after the Master had started for 
the West. Every anniversary after that, the Emperor 
bad visited the building. On the very day that the 
Cherubim arrived with the travellers, the Emperor was 
there. The Cherubim would not descend to earth, but 
let the four travellers down, with their loads of 
Scriptures, telling them that they would wait there till 
they returned to say the books had been delivered, 
adding, " But be quick for we are to be back in eight 
days, and more than five are already' spent." 

When they neared the Librarj', the Emperor and 
officials saw them arriving, and came doAvn from the 
upper stor}' to meet them. The Emperor said, 
" Royal Brother, you have arrived." The Master fell 
on his knees and kowtowed. The Emperor raised him 
up, and asked, "Who are these with you?" The 
Ambassador said they were his disciples, and introduced 
each, saying what they had been, and how they liad 
been converted bj' Kwanyin, and had volunteered to 
escort him on the whole journey. 



THE PILGRIMS FINISHED WORK 351 

The news of the Master's return soon spread 
through the city, and crowds ran to see him. He 
entered the Palace with the Emperor and thanked him 
for his great interest, and the loads of Scripture were 
brought in by his disciples. The Emperor asked the 
number of the Scriptures, how they had fared by the 
way, how they had reached the Spiritual Mountain and 
seen Buddha. The Master told how he had been 
given Wordless Scriptures the first time, and how, after 
he had presented the Emperor's golden bowl in order to 
secure the Scriptures, he had then been giveii the 
Written Scriptures, which comprised selections from 
thirty-five works, numbering 5,048 books from the 
three collections. The Emperor was greatly pleased 
and ordered refreshments for the pilgrims. Seeing the 
three strange disciples below, the Emperor asked if they 
were foreignei-s. Then the Master gave the history of 
each. 

^'My chief disciple is named Sun. His religious 
name is Seeker of Truth (Wu Kung) . He is from the 
continent of Nan Chen Pu Chow, the Aolai country, the 
Orchard ISIountain and the Waterfall Cave. Five 
hundred years ago, he made a great disturbance in 
Heaven and on that account was imprisoned on the 
borders of the Aborigines' or barbarian, country under 
a mountain. After listening to the exhortations of 
Kwanyin, who pitied him, he was willing to repent. 
When I reached that place I delivered him out of his 
prison and I found him a most valuable escort. 

'Jfy second disciple is named Chu (Pig). His 
religious name is the Seeker of Strength (Wu Neng). 



352 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

and also Pa Kiel (the eight commandments). He is a 
native of Fu Ling mountain, and the Cloud Inn cave. 
On account of his robberies at Kao Lai village, he was 
punished. But Kwanyin had mercj' on him and 
exhorted him to repent. As my chief disciple was 
willing for his company, Chu, on account of his 
strength, was ordered to carrj' our baggage all the waj'. 
He could also work well in water. 

^My third disciple is named Sa (^Sand) . His religious 
name is Seeker of Purity (\Vu Tsing). I also called him 
Sa Ho Shang. He lived at Quicksands River and was a 
robber. He also was converted by Kwanyin, and is 
sometimes called a Shaman. 

"The horse is not that which the Emperor gave nie. " 

The Emperor said, "It is very much like it." 
The Master replied, "When I arrived at the Snake 
mountain, in one of the torrents there your horse was 
swallowed by tins horse, then in the shape of a dragon. 
My chief disciple found out the histoi-y of this horse, 
that it was a foal of the Dragon King of the Western 
sea. Owing to its lawlessness it had been punished, 
but was afterwards forgiven and converted by Kwanyin. 
It was taken to carry me on the journey, and in a 
moment it was changed into the semblance of the 
other horse. It was very useful in crossing mountains 
and rivers, and in riding great distances. On our return 
it carried our load of Scriptures." (See also Chap. 94), 

On hearing this, the Emperor was full of wonder 
and gratitude. Then he asked about the distance they 
had travelled. The Master replied, " We have travelled 
about 108,000 li, but we did not keep a careful record. 



THE PILGRIMS FINISHED WORK 353 

But I know that we spent 14 years on the way, met 
many robbers and evil spirits. We had our passports 
examined in many lands." He then called his chief 
disciple to bring the passport to show to the Emperor 
the many seals stamped on it. 

They were those of the following countries: — 

1. Pao Siang Country. Chap. 29. 7. Monks' Country. Chap. 78. 

2. Wu Ki Country. Chap. 37. 8. Anarchist Country. Chap. 84. 

3. Che Chih Country. Chap, 44. 9. Feng Shan Province. Chap. 87. 

4. The Women's 

Coantryo£ Shi Liang. Chap. 54. 10. Yn Hwa chow (sub-prefec- 
ture.) Chap. 88. 

5. Chi Sai Country. Chap. 62. 11. Kin Ping(preftctHre.)Chap. 91. 

6. Vermillion Country. Chap. fiS. 

At this time dinner was announced, and the Master 
and his disciples dined with the Emperor. After that 
the officials, both civil and military, came, and the Em- 
peror seated himself in their midst. The Pilgrims were 
invited to join, and singing and dancing, and instru- 
mental music crowned the day with rejoicing. 

It was a Eoyal banquet worthy of the ancient kings. 
To have received the Scriptures was a joy to overflowing. 
They were to transmit to future generations the best of the pa-st 
The light of God to illnininate the Eoyal domains. 

Next morning the Emperor came and said he had 
no means of thanking the Master properly for his great 
services, but he presented him with an Introduction to 
the Scriptures. It is as follows in next page. 



The Emperoi-'s Introdwction to these Scriptures 

We have heard how the invisible forces of Yin and 
Yang, that brood over and produce all life, are represent- 
ed by the visible sun and moon. The four seasons, 
though themselves unseen, by the action of heat and cold, 
produce all growth. By looking to heaven above or earth 
beneath, even the most ignorant know this influence of 
Yin and Yang. But the wisest cannot explain them 
fully. By what we see, it is easy to know that there are 
these forces. They cannot be fully understood because 
they are invisible. But their influence is known by what 
is visible. Even the ignorant have no doubt about 
them. Their form is invisible, and their workings be- 
yond the knowledge of the learned. Plow much more 
difficult, therefore, is it to understand the religion of 
Buddha, which deals entirely with the unseen, the dark 
and the quiet, but which exercises profound influence 
over all beings throughout the universe. It is,unsurpass- 
ed in high majesty, and in the smallest details it is Di- 
vine. Its greatness penetrates all space; there is no space 
so small that it does not permeate. It is not born ; it 
does not die. It remaiiis throughout all time, and never 
ages. Wliether visible or invisible, it brings all bless- 
ings even now. Wonderful doctrine, most mysterious! 
Those who study it find it unlimited ; its influences reach- 
ing everywhere in silence. They try to grasp it, but they 
cannot find the fountain head. How much less can the 



THE PILGRIMS FINISHED WORK 355 

ordinary man with his small ability and knowledge find 
out its full secret. 

On examining the origin of this great religion, we 
find it arose in the Western land. During the Han 
dynasty we heard of it as of a dream, which flowed with 
its mercy to the Eastern lands. At first by Buddha's 
example and teaching, before the doctrine was fully 
understood, the people believed he appeared on earth 
to do good, and honoured him. But after he returned 
to God, and generations passed, they forgot the true 
character of the Founder, and did not reflect the 
Light of the World, but made beautiful images, fine 
paintings, and, vsatbout authority, drew thirty-two marks 
or forms. Thus his main doctrines spread far and 
wide to save men from the three roads of transmigra- 
tion (hell, demons, and animals) , and left traditions 
everywhere to lead men along the ten paths of Bud- 
dhism. But true religion is not easy to spread without 
varying views arising. Plausible views are easily 
followed, and thus arise both true and false interpreta- 
tions. Therefore the doctrine of the seen and unseen is 
expounded in various ways, according to the customs of 
the world ; some asserting one view and others denying 
it. 

So the schools of Primitive and Higher Buddhism 
flourish according to time and circumstance. 

Then the Eeligious Teacher, Huen Chwang, a leader 
of Buddhism appeared. From his youth he was resolute 
and intelligent, and understood the vanity of the world. 
When grown he corhprehended the spiritual — the laws 
governing life and death, and underlying providence. 



356 MISSION TO HEAVEiN 

and making for contentment — as clearh- as the wind 
in the forest, or the moon mirrored in the water, and 
more beautiful than the dews of heaven. Therefore he 
knew everything, even before it took visible form , and was 
above being influenced by the senses, and in all the past 
he had no equal. He cultivated his heart the whole time, 
and mourned over the mutilation of the true doctrine. 
Studying the doctrine, he deplored that even the best 
books had many mistakes. Pie thought of revising them 
all, for wide publication, by striking out the errors, and 
preserving only the true, for the benefit of students. He 
thought of the Pure Land, and of visiting it for the 
purpose of religion. Leaning on his staff he went alone ; 
he risked danger, and travelled far. In the morning 
drifting snow would bury the paths. In the evening 
clouds of sand would blow so that the sky was invisible. 
Ten thousand li of mountains and rivers he crossed. 
Through mist and fog, through heat and cold, through 
frost and rain, he pressed on. Because his zeal was great, 
he considered his trials light, being determined to suc- 
ceed. He spent fourteen years (Sianfu Stone rubbing 
says seventeen j^ears. — Trans. ) in travelling from country 
to country, in order to find the truth. Through two 
great forests and across eight rivers he learned various 
truths. In fine parks and on high mountain peaks he saw 
strange sights. He learned the high thoughts of Buddha, 
and their purposes, from the best teachers studying the 
mysteries of religion and its very essence. Thus he 
learned by heart the six teachings of the three schools — in 
all a hundred loads of scriptures, and like waves their 
truth bubbled from his lips Although he travelled 



THE PILGRIMS FINISHED WORK 357 

through innumerable countries, the scriptures were a 
definite number. He received the most important of 
Higher Buddhism, thirtj'-five works (Sianfu monument 
says six hundred and fiftj'-seven. — ^Traus.) , consisting of 
five thousand and fortj'-eight (5,048) books for the 
purpose of translation and distribution in China, to make 
known the Great Religion. He brought the merciful 
clouds of the West to fall in fine rain in the East. Thus 
the imperfect doctrines of religion are con-ected. By the 
power of the Great Religion, sinful men can subdue evil 
and be saved, just as water can put out fire. Travelling 
through the sea of life, it affords the voyager calm water 
instead of tmnultuous waves, vrhereby he can reach the 
other shore in peace. Thus we know that if we do sin, 
we must have punishment; if we do good, we shall be 
raised to Heaven. Good and evil are reached bj' man 
himself. The cinnamon grows on the mountain ridge, 
nourished by clouds and dew, and impurities cannot 
reach it; it brings forth flowers, not because the nature 
of the cinnamon is good, but because its growing-place 
is pure. Again, the lotus grows in clear water, and dust 
cannot fall on its leaves ; this is not because the nature 
of the lotus is pure, but because impuritj' cannot reach its 
home. Thus, if even the vegetable kingdom knows the 
importance of good environment, how can men attain 
perfection except by abiding in virtue ? 

I hope these Scriptures will abide for ever as the sun 
and moon, and that the great blessings found therein 
will spread over the earth and heavens. 



Many oflicials congratulated the Emperor on the 



358 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Introduction. The Emperor said he would now like to 
have some of the new Scriptures explained. The Master 
replied, " Let there be a suitable fine place prepared, 
from which I may expound the Scriptures, and as the 
Scriptures should be preserved carefully, copies should 
be made for wide distribution." The Emperor at once 
commanded the Hanlins and best writers to make copies. 
Meanwhile a stage was erected from which the Master 
was to read. The disciples were also asked to go on the 
platform, and the reading was about to commence when 
the eight Cherubim appeared in the air and called out, 
" Reader of the Scriptures, return with us at once to the 
West." Then in a moment the Master, his disciples, and 
even the horse, rose in the air and were spirited away. 
The Emperor and his officials were greatly terrified at 
this, and worshipped towards the sky. 

The Holy priests had exerted their energies to procure the 

Scriptures. 
They had spent fourteen years on their travels, 
Tliey liad suffered many trials on the way, 
Many hardships, crossing mountains and rivers, 
Their good work was now accomplished. 
Through a thousand efforts. 
The wonderful Scriptures of greatest Wisdom 
To their country had been brought 
And to this day are studied in the land. 

When worship was over, the Emperor and many of 
his officials established the Land and Water Societj- for 
the salvation of ALL SOULS suffering in Hades, and 
eminent priests were appointed to read these Scriptures. 

The eight Cherubim led the Master, his three dis- 
ciples and the horse; in all, five individuals, back to the 



THE PILGRIMS FINISHED WORK 359 

Spiritual Mountain, and the whole journey, both coming 
and going, was accomplished in eight days exactly. 
When they arrived, Julai had called a great meeting of all 
the gods and saints, who were listening to his teaching. 
The eight Cherubim announced the return of the pilgrims, 
having accomplished their mission of delivering the 
Scriptures to China, and they brought them forward 
to receive the honours which Julai wished to confer on 
them. Julai thanked each one for his long and faithful 
service, saying, " Holy monk, in a former life you were 
my disciple, second in rank, called Kin Shen. But, be- 
cause you did not study carefully, and looked down on 
our great religion (Nestorianism) you were condemned 
to be re-born in China. Fortunately you have now 
believed our religion and fetched the true Scriptures." 

Then Julai conferred special honours on the 
pilgrims: — 

1. The Master was canonized as the Buddha of 
Sweet Incense (Yeu Tan). 

2. His chief disciple was canonized as the Buddha 
Victorious in War, and his hat of spikes was removed. 

3. Plis second disciple M'as canonized one of the 
Angels of the Pure Altar. 

4. His third disciple was canonized as the Golden 
Lohan (arhat or angel). 

5. The white horse was canonized as Chief over 
the eight Boards of the Dragons of Heaven. 

Thus, 

The various members of the whole body of the True Model 

on earth 
Were in harmony with Him. 



360 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

Both matter and spirit were once more quiet. 

No evil spirits were to trouble any more, 

The fruit of the Spirit was seen in following the Greatest 

Wisdom. 
Thus perfection was attained and Hades escaped, 
The Scriptures, circulated everywhere, filled the woi-ld v.ith 

light. 
The five holy ones were elevated to tlie highest state. 
During this ceremony of canonization all the Bud- 
dhas and Boddhisattvas, the holy priests, Lohans, Angels, 
all saints from all mountains and caves, all local gods 
and spirits, and all who had attained to immortality 
from the b^inning of time, attended and sat in their 
respective seats in the midst of glory indescribable. 
The faithful seraphs gathered on gorgeous clouds. 
In the blissful atmosphere of Paradise ; 
Where great dragons and fierce tigers lie together in peace, 
Where sun and moons come and go. 
Where great dragons play together, 
Where birds of Paradise flit liappily about, 
And black monkeys and rare white deer are found. 
There beautiful flowers of all seasons, 
Ripe fruit of all kinds abound. 
Tall pines and lovely bamboos. 
Flowers of all colours, 
Immortal peaches all ripe. 

Then they all folded their hands, worshipped, and 
chanted the following New Anthem in Heaven: — 

1. We take refuge, or believe, 

In the Aucieut Buddha (God), who created Light. 

2. In the Great Physician of the Crystal Sea. 

3. In the world honoured teacher, Shakyamuni*. 

4. In the God of the past, present and future. 

5. In the God of pure joy. 

•The Shakyamuni of Primitive Buddhism never rose from the dead. That 
ol Higher Buddhism did after three days. See The Resurrection of Shaka in 
the Kara Museum, Japan, and also N. T. of Higher Buddhism, p. 190 note. 



THE PILGRIMS FINISHED WORK 



361 



6. In Vairochana (the snn of Righteousness.) 

7. In the canopy Prince. 

8. In the Messiali. 

9. In Omito Fo (Amitabha.) 

10. In the God of Endless Age. (The Eternal.) 

11. In Him who welcomes men to heaven. 

12. In Him who is the indestructible Diamond. 

13. In Him who is precious Light. 

14. In the most terrible One. 

15. In Him who is the Essence of joy and progress. 

16. In Him who is the Reflected Light. 

17. In Him who has no darkness. 

18. In Varuna. 

19. In Brahma the Creator. 

20. In Him of all glorious merit. 

21. In Him who is most able. 

22. In Him who goes about doing good, 

23. In Him with the light of the Sandal-wood banner. 

24. In Him with the Mani canopy. 

25. In Him who shines with great wisdom. 

26. In Him whose goodness is vast as the ocean. 

27. In Him who is Great in mercy. 

28. In Him who is Strongest in mercy. 

29. In Him who is Chief in all goodness. 

30. In Him who is God of boundless glory. 

31. In Him who is the God of golden glory. 

32. In Him who is an able Counsellor. 

33. In Him who is surpassingly wise. 

34. In Him who is the world's restful Light. 

35. In Him who is the Light of the sun and moon. 

36. In Him who illuminates the sun and moon. 

37. In Him who is the Lord of the Wisdom Canopy. 

38. In Him who is the Gospel Sound. 

39. In Him whois permanent Light of the Canopy of the lieavens. 

40. In Him who is the Lamp of the World. 

41. In the King of Perfect law. 

42. In Him who is the Light of Mount Jleru. 

43. In the All-wise and All-powerful King. 

44. In the Light of the Golden Ocean, (space?) 



362 MISSION TO HEAVEN 

45. In Him whose great li<rht pervades all the universe. 

46. in Him who is the mighty Liglit. 

47. In Him with the merit of the Sandal Wood Banner. 

48. In Him who is ever victorions. 

49. In Kwanyin. 

50. In the Mighty One. 

51. In Saint WSn Shu. 

52. In Saint Pu Hien. 

53. In Mohammed of the Great Sea. 

54. In the great Lotus. Society. 

55. In all the Saints of Paradise. 

56. In the three thousand great choristers? (Giete, S^) ? 

57. In the 500 great witnesses. 

58. In the monks and nuns. 

59. In the saints who follow the boundIe.?s and universal law. 

60. In the Holy Cherubim. 

61. In the angels who serve at the sacred Altar. 

62. In the burning Seraphim (Lohans?) 

63. In all the mighty Powers throughout the Universe. 

We desire that the virtues and glory of the Pure 
Land be pleasing to the four pilgrims, and be the 
salvation of all human sufferers. If any who hear the 
Scriptures are made to find wisdom, and reach the Happy 
Land, it will gratify all the Buddhas and Boddhisattvas, 
and the perfect saints of all the Universe. 






3^^ 



i,(.' 

~'--i 




t-^rf.-tan'j'saaaiiiatf-ga. i i nnfiJiaijt ifti*-. r- i^itx 



Tai Ching Kukg 'ic fn ^ the Chief Monastery in LAOSirANr, 
Shantung, in 1913. Ciiiu Chang Chun began iiis iEoN- 

ASTtC IjIFE in LaOSHAN. 



INDEX 



^^Q-^^ 



Amazons, 229, 231 

Amitabha 96, 164, 361 

Ananda,... 96, 100, 103, 339-341 
Ancient of Days, 69, 70, 72, 
77, 89, 92, 93, 102, 184, 189, 

190, 197, 227, 228, 277, 341 
Angel, Barefooted, ... 67, 72 
Ao-lai, 2, 13, 27, 28, etc., 319, .351 
Ao Kwang, see Dragon King 

Ao Kin, J 

Ao San, > 33, 34 

Ao Yun, ) 

Arhats, 105, 209, 359 

Assembly of the Saints, ... 241 
Attitude towards Christian- 
ity, XTII 

Author not narrow-minded, viii 

BelJs, The three, 269 

Better understanding with 

better knowledge, ... xxix 
Black Chief, see Disturber of 

the World's Peace. 
Black Water Kiver, 205, 206, 207 
Black Wind (— Mt., —De- 
mons), 145,146,147 

Blue Dragon Mt, 313, 315 

Boddhisattva, 241, 256, 274, 

337, 341, 360, 362 

Book, The v 

Book of Life, 39, 120, 131 

Brahma, 361 

Bridge of Despair, 122 



Broad-minded author, ... viii 
Buddha, 2, 7, 66, 69, 90, 95- 
105, 135, 136, 142, 151, 160, 
170, 181, 206, 210, 221, 237, 
249. 256, 283, 297, 307, 312, 
313, 320-322, 330-333, 3»6, 

337-341, 348, 351, 354-362 
Buddhism (or Buddhist), 8, 
16, 23, 40, 42, 77, 133-136, 
141, 153, 156, 167, 170, 190, 
196, 207-211, 219, 223, 234, 
245, 249, 273, 286-290, 301, 

321, 335, 337, 344, 355 
Calixtus, Pope, xxvr, xxxiv 
Cassock (of Kwanyin), 133, 

144, 145, 151, etc. 
Catalogue of Scriptures. 242-244 
Cave of Heaven (called also 
Waterscreen or Waterfall 
Cave),5,7, 13,21,22, 23,38, 
41, 42, 44, 50, u8, 173, 175, 

234-240, 351 
Celestial Emperor, see Ruler 

of Heaven. 
Changan, see Sianfu. 

Changkgng, 275 

Chaos 1,94, 334 

Characteristics of the book, 

some, XV 

Che Cliih(Slow Carts) Conn- 
try, 207-218 

' Chen Family, 219, 222 



INDEX 



Chen Kwaiig Jui, ... 109, 110, 133 
Cherubim, 96, 101, 105, 241, 

2-56, 336, 34J, 345, 346, 349, 

350, 35S-362 
Chief Char.ieters, Emblems, 

Symbols, Terras, xxxiv 

China Sea, 25 

Chow Dynasty 135 

Chin Wa 258 

Chu Wu S^ng, Seeker after 

Strength 107, etc., .see also 

Pa Kiel 
Chu Pa Kiei 107, etc., see 

Pa Kiei 
City of tlie Dead -10 

see also Hades 

Cloud Ferry 332-334 

Commander,Great Victorious, 

see Great Victorious Spirit. 
Comparative List of Sacred 

Books, XXV 

Comparison with Modern 

Solutions xiu 

Coafucianisin, 7, 16, 1.S3, j67, 

219, 338, 344 
Constellations,... 62, 214, 257,277 

Continents, 2, 3, 339 

Crocodile demons, 37, 57 

Crystal Palace 29, 32 

r 

Demon Kingr, see Disturber 

of the World's Peace. 
Development of Religion 

parallel in the East and 

West xxHi 

Diamond (or Magic) coil or 

case 90, 227, 228 

Difference between Hinayana 

and Mahayana, xxi 



Disturber of the World's 

Peace (Black Chief or 

Demon King) 22, 27 

Dowager Empress 126 

Dragon, 3, 18, 27, 112, 117, 

142, 143, etc. 
Dragon King(Ao Kwaiig)29- 

34,41,42,109, 111,112,140, 

163, 215, 216 

Dualism, 16 

East Continent, 2, 3, 21 

Economics controlled by 

Moral Principles, ... xxviii 

Elders, 62, 101 

Elf, 28, 29 

Emperor, Celestial, see Ruler 

of Heaven. 
Emperor, Chinese 112-136, 

236, 263, 290, 337, 341, 349- 

353, 357-35S 
Emperor's Introduction, ... 354 

Emptiness, 241, 242 

Equal of Heaven (see also ... 51 

Holy One) 
Eternal Life 94, 98 

(see also Immortality) 
Everlasting life, Mt of, see 

Wan Shou Slian 
Executioner Chao ... 120-126 
Fairies, 64, 6.5, 67, 71, 101, 102, 

107, 150, 166, 172, ISO, 187, 320 
Fairies, Chief or General of, 

320, 332 

Fairy rabbit, 323 

Fairy stone, 14 

Feng Shan 306, 307 

F6ngtu Office, 117 

F6!!gtu City, 121 



INDEX 



First Cause, 250 

Flaming Mountain, ... 244, 246 
Fo Tsu (Buddhist Foiinder 

of B«ligion), 335 

Fountain of Wisdom, ... 11, 13 

Form, 241, 242, 325 

Four Governors or Eulers, 

62, 81, 84, 101, 107 

Fox King 246 

Fruit of Immortality, 169 

Fu Ling Shan, 107, 150, 321, 352 

Ganges, 103 

Garden Mountain (see Mt 
Garden) 

Geni 39, 97 

Giete, 337 

Ginseng, 166-168 

God, 3, 19, 41, 46, 47, 105, 108, 
139, 166, 241, 270, 282, 302, 
312, 321, 328, 329, 345, 349, 

355, 360, 361 

Golden Pill, 17 

Gorilla demons, 37, 57 

Gourd, 184-189 

Hades, 37, 38, 42, 112, 115-124, 
130-134, 236, 240, 241, 263, 

280, 290, 320, 327, 358 

Han dynasty, 135, 355 

Hanlins, 358 

Heart Prayer or Creed of 

Half Asia, 152-3, 205, 217, 302 
Heaven, (Celestial Palace),, 
2,19,26,40,41,66,122,129, 
167, 198, 211, 228, 246, 249, 
250, 257, 262, 267, 275, 285, 
288, 290, 293, 294, 296, 299, 
306, 307, 310, 315, 320, 321, 

328, 349, 357 



Hell, 27, 66, 116, 121 

Hells (meaning tortures) ... 121 

Helpmeet, 16 

Hien Kang Shan, 291, 294 

Higher Buddhism, VIII, 134, 

355, 357 
Highest Creed of Asia, ... xxiii 
Highest Ideal of Man, ... xsiii 
Hing Chieh, Sun the Practical 

first named, 140 

Holy One, The Equal of 
Heaven, first named, ... 60 

How to Pray, 310 

Huen Oh wangjDifferent spell- 
ings of note I 

Huen Chwang, First named. 109 
Hui An (or Mu To), 77, 78, 
79, 106, 133, 161, 162, 240, 295 

Hnns, 90,135 

Illuminator, 152 

Immortals, 7, 9, 10, 18, 43, 167, 

169, 170, 209, 242, 329 
Immortal Pill, see Pill 
Incarnate Model or Julai, 
see Julai 

India, 306, 313, 317 

Introduction to Buddhist 
Scriptures by Chinese Em- 
peror, 354 

Iron Fan, 244-247. 

Ito, Prince xin 

Julai, 96, 100-102, 167, 183, 
205, 227, 229, 235, 239-243, 
257, 282, 200, 295, 297, 298, 

335, 345, 359 

Jupiter, 48 

Justice, Minister of, 113, 114, 
(gee also Wei Wei) ... 115,119 



INDEX 



Kaifengfu, 124, 130, 132 

Kalpa, 1,13,97, 98 

Kao Lai Chwaiig, 148 

Kasyapii, ... 96, ]00, 103, 339, 341 
Key to I'ifEcult Terms... xxii 

Kia Lan, 159, 337 

Kiang Cliow, 109 

KiangLui, 109 

Ki Kn Park, 3!7 

Kilin 39, 283 

Kin Hung, 41, 77 

Kin Kwang Tze, 251 

Kin Shen converted from 
Primitive Buddhism, 290, 359 
(also see Incarnate Model) 

Kin To, 295 

Kinsman, 80, 81 

Knowledge, Great, 144 

Ko memorialises against the 

3Ionkey, 42 

Kwan Ciiow river, 80, 87, 91, 93 
Kwanyin, 66, 77, 80, 89, 104, 
305, 106, 110, 115, 132, 133, 
134, 140-146, 158, 160, 162, 
170, 201, 20:;, 223, 232, 234- 
240, 244, 26S, 277, 295, 300, 
320, 321, 330, 344, 346, 350, 

351, So-:, 362 

Labyrinth Cave, 270 

Lama 289 

Lessons, Invaluable, xi 

Li To Ta, see Prince Li Tola 

Li Yu Yin?, 131 

Li Chang Kang, 159 

Life of the Autlior ix 

Lightning Goddess, ...215,216 

Ling KI Pasa, 169 

Lin's Shan, ... (see 283, 298 
Spiritual ML) 



Ling Shao Hall, 89, 94, 95, 99, 

100, 294 

Ling Yuen Hall, 77 

Lion demons, 37, 57 

Lion and Camel Cave, 275,282,302 
List of Conntriea travelled 

tlirongh 353 

Liu Chuen, 130, 131 

Lin Hni'g, 110 

Lin Pei Kin 1.37 

Lo Kia Shan, 143, 147 

Loclias, 244, 245 

Lohan, 66, 227, 241, 256, 337, 

341, 359, 360 

Lolos, 143 

Longevity, Star of 288 

Lotus, ... 96, 103, 283, 357, 362 
Lotus Cave, ... 182, 184, 189 
Magic cap 235, — circle 224- 

229, —coil 227, 228, —fan 

244-247 —bag 260 

Mahayana, 347 

JIalay Continent, 25 

Market, 28 

Massage, 17 

Ma=ter, 13-21 (name for 

Huen Chvpang) 140, onwards. 

Converted from Primitive 

Buddhism, 359 

^Taster of the Horse, ... 48, 50 

Matter, 267 

Mercury, 103 

Meru Mt. 159, 160, 183, 361 

Messiah, see also Mileh Fo, 361 

Middle Caves, 66 

Mileh Fo (The Messiah), 259, 

260, 291 
Milky Way, 31, 35, 62, 107, 

219-223. 347 



INDEX 



Mind, 1, 18, 267 

Ming Ti 135 

Model, Perfect or True, 13, 

94, 139, 193, 329, 359 

ilohammed 362 

Morning Star, 62. 137 

Mortal, 22, 320 

Mother and Child river, ... 229 
Mountain Garden, 21-23, 28, 
30,38, 41,49, 73, 76,78,80*, 
81, 88, 90, 178, 227,243,319, 351 
(Called also Flower and 
Fruit Mt.) 
Mountain, Spiritual (Ling- 
shau ) , 96, 2S3, 298, 312, 328, 
330-332, 335, 337, 341, 359 
Mu To, see Hui An 
Mystery, Great, ... 161, 347, 354 
Mystery of Universal Law, ... 241 

Nato, 293 

Nanjio, 344 

Nature 17, 267 

Nature's Mountain, 92 

Natural Sage 29, 38 

Needle (Magic), 35, 66, 88, 94 

etc. 
Nestoriauism rediscovered, xxxi 
Nestorians, ... note 259, 309, 359 
New Anthem in Heaven, ... 360 

Nine Bright Stars, 62, 101 

Nine-headed Demon, ... 311, 312 
Nirvana or Nothingness, ... 255 

North Pole, 66 

Northern Stars, 66 

Olopen, footnote, 259 

Ouiei Mountain 183, 283 

Omito, 361 

One-horned king, 50 



Orchard (see Peach orchard 

and Mountain orchard) 

Ox devil, 37. 57 

Ox-headed king or Demon, 

202, 203, 230, 245, 248 
Pa Kiel (First called Wu 

N6ng) 150-152 

PaoLinSze 191,193, 194 

Pao Lieu Tiii Palace 282 

PaoYing -.. 295 

Paradise, 223,260,2S2,33&,360, 362 

Patriarchs, 136 

Peach Orchard, ... 60, 64, 70 

Permanent Youth, ix 

Phoenix 39, Five Phoenix 

Hall, 213 

Physician, Great, 360 

Pi Lan 274 

Pilgrims, 107 

Pilgrim, The story of each,... 351 

Pilgrim's Progress, vii 

Pill 197 

Pill of Immortality, 69, 70, 

72,74,90,92,103,147,190, 267 

Pilot, 333, 335 

Ping Ting Shan, 182 

Pipa Cave 232 

Plague 266-267 

Plum Mountain, 81 

Power increased by Prayer 310 

Pray, How to 310 

Prime Minister, 133, 135 

Primitive Buddhism 

18, 134, 255, 355 
Prince, or Judge, of Hades, 

38, 40, 42, 200 
Princess of the Elephant 

Country, 176-181 



\ 



INDEX 



Prince Li To ta, 52, 54-57, 

73, 75-78, 82, 87, 90, 101, 

293-296, 320, 335 
Prince Nato, 52, 54-56, 73, 

75-78, 82, 87, 186, 294, 295 
Providence, 191, 197,226,255, 263 

Pu Hien, 283, 362 

Pure Land Country ... 259, 362 
PureOnes, Three,62, 66, 101, 367 
Purity, Seeker after (see also 107 

Sa S6ng and Sa Wu Tsing) 
Pusa, 66, 96, 105, 159, 160, 260 

Putu, 171 

Queen of Amazone, 231 

Queen of Heaven, 63, 64, 66, 

71, 89, 102, 161, 252 
Queen of Pure Land, 259 

„ „ Wu Ki 195 

Quicksands, 161, 321 

Quietism, 16 

Real and apparent, 241 

Ked Child Demon (named 

Steward), ...199,240,244, .300 



Refuges, Three, 



30 



Register (of Life and Death) 

39, 40, 42 

Re-incarnation, 8 

Religion, 180, 199, 254, 255, 
265, 285, 289, 309, 319, 335, 

338, 347, 357, 359 

Religions, Three, 136 

Religions, Five 185 

Religious Co-operation in- 
stead of Persecution, xxxii 

Rhinoceros, 215 

Righteousness, 253 

River of Despair, 123 

River of Heaven (see also ... 219 
Milky Way) 



Roc demons, 37, 57 

Roc, Great 283 

Royal Wizard 213-217 

Ruler (or Emperor) of 
Heaven (Taoist), 41 50-58, 
62, 67, 69, 70, 77, 78, 82. 
91. 92, 95-97, 101, 106-108, 
133, 215, 240, 249, 294, 

298, 307, 315 
Sa S6ng, Seeker after Purity 107 

and after 
Sa Wu Tsing (see Sa S6ng),... 107 
Sacred Books, see Scriptures 
SHge, 29-33, 99, 135, 159, 212 

Sakyamuni, 96, 139, 241, 317, 

336, 360 

Salvation, 347 

Sanskrit, 134 

Schools of Thought 16 

Scriptures, 105, 106, 133, 1.34, 
142, 151, 156, 162, 167, 174, 
179, 192, 206, 210, 214, 231, 
234, 235, 236, 240, 263, 282, 
284, 289, 290, 310, 321, 322, 

329, 335, 337-353 

Scriptures, List of, 342 

Searcher of Secrets (Sun), 15 
18, 20, etc. 

Senses, Five 140 

Serpent Star 259 

Seraphim, 337, 362 

Sex, 18 

Shakyamuni, see Sakyamuni 
Shaman (Scliolars), 275, 331, 339 

Shang Ching, 101 

Shang Liang, ...124, 128, 130, 132 

Shen Pu, 2, 8 

Shen or Taoist Saint, 66, 94, 
95,102,147,159,166,170.171, 186 



INDEX 



Shie li Relics, 252 

Si an fu (or Chang An), 105, 

108, 111, 112, 113, 133,296, 

350, 356, 357, ...foot note 259 
Slow Carts Country, 207, 208, 213 

South Pole, 119, 288 

Southern Ocean, 234, 238, 239 

Southern Star, 92 

Spirit, 18, 47, 101, 324, 330, 

Infinite — 100 : Original — 

183: Gt. Victorious Spirit 

52, 53, Gt. first— 193 
Stars find named (see also 

Nine Bright Stars) 101 

Steward, (at first called Bed 

ChWA Demon) 204 

Stone, living (see also Fairy 

Stone) 3 

Stone Monkey ... 4-6, 43, 242 
Strength. Seeker after, 107, 151 

(!=ee Wu Neng) 

Stud master 46, 94 

Su Mao Duke, 127 

Sun, Searcher of Secrets ... 15 
Sun becomes a Doctor ... 263 
Sun feels pulse by a string... 265 
Sun and moon, 3, 6, 18, 19, 43, 

64,129,187,192,338,354,357, 361 
Sun Lo Hall, 39, 40, 119, 120, 

128, 131 
Supreme Being(seealso Euler 

of Heaven) 240 

Sword, 24, 27 

Szechuan, 283 

Ta Mo, 136 

Tai Ching 101 

Tai Chung Emperor, 113, 116 118 

Tai Kung 148 

Tai Pei (see Venus) 



Tai Yi, 66 

Tang Dynasty 108, 120 

Taoism or Taoist, 7. 16, 23, 
66, 89, 101, 133, 146, 166, 
151, 167, 169, 185, 207-218, 
226, 227, 268, 273, 285, 320, 

829-331, 347 

Tartar Country 138 

Telescope, 3 

Ten Offices of Hades 38 

Teng Tien 215 

Ti Tsang Pusa 241 

Three Islands 3, 66 

Three Powers, 2, 6 

„ Religions 16 

„ Star Cave, 11, 20 

•Thunder God, 211, 214, 215, 

257, 266 
Tortoise, ... 223, 259, 347. 348 
Transformation of Charac- 
ter, XXVII 

Transmigration or Rebirth, 

8, 121, 125, 133, 134 

Tree of Life 10 

Tripitaka 344 

True Model (see Model) 

Truth, 12, 18, 19, 159 

Tsei Yun Shan, 244 

Tsin Hao Sze 290 

Tain Kwang, 119 

Tsui Ju, 112-125, 129 

TsungEn 66 

Tung Hwa, 171 

Tung Ming Palace or Hall, 

41, 67, 72, 91, 94 
Tung Tien Ho (or Milky 

Way), 219 

TzeChow 117 

Tze Tsu Lin 171 



INDEX 



UiS4irs 143 

Unicorn Continent, 25 

Universal Law 241, 362 

Universal Love, 16 

Universe,... 4, 41, 242, 309, 362 

Vairochana, 361 

Varuna, 361 

Venus (Tai Pei), 44, 46, 59, 

60, 211, 294-296, 298, 315 

Vermillion Country 263 

Wan Shou Shan, ... 166, 169 

Water of Life, 170, 190 

Waterfall or Waters-creen 
Cave, see Cave of Heaven 

Wei river, 126 

Wei Wei, >Iinister of Justice, 

117, 119, 126, 127 
Wen Shu Pnsa, ... 198, 283, 362 
White Tiger Hall, ...126, 152, 300 
Wieger's, Dr., Catalogue of 

Taoist Sacred Books, xxvi 
Wind Demon (false doct- 
rine) 158-160 171 



Wisdom, 242, 255, 264, 358, 360 

Wizard. Royal, 213-217 

Wordless Scriptures, ... 340, 351 

Wu Ki Country, 193 

Wu Neng, see Seeker after 
Strength 

Wu Tai Shan, 198,283 

Wu Tang, 260 

Xavier ixxiv 

Yamen, 49 

Yang (Yin) 354 

'Yellow Lion Demon, ... 310, 311 
Yen Lo, King of Hades, 38, 

42, 115, 117, 131 
Yea Yen (Providence), ... 2.55 

Yin Star, 323 

Yu, 31 

Yii Ching, 101 

Yu Hwang, 66 

Yu Wha, 309 

Yuen Low Palace 294 



is^S»S2^ 



IMPORTANT MODERN BOOKS 

ON THE 

Environment and Development of Buddhism 



Peryplus of the Er3'^threan Sea. 
Indian Shipping by Mookergi. 
Jao Ju Kwa by Rockhill and Hirth. 
Waddel's Buddhism of Tibet. 
Edmunds' Buddhist and Christian Gospels. 
Griinwedel's Mythologie des Buddhism us. 
Buddhist Art in India by Griinwedel. 
Arthur Lloyd's Wheat among the Tares. 

,, ,, Creed of Half Japan. 

Stein's Ruins of Desert Cathay. 
Buddhism by Mrs. Ehys Davids. 
Dr. L. Wieger's Extracts from the Buddhist Tri- 
pitaka, in French. 
Dr. L. Wieger's Catalogue of Taoist Standard Works, 

in French 

The smallness of the Taoist collection compared with the great- 
ness of the Buddhist shows the relative importance of their literature. 

E. A. G.'s World Healers or the Lotus Gospel. 

Prof. Sayce of Oxford says of the laat hook "that he is amazed at 
the extent of the research, that it is one of tlie most interesting books 
yet written on Comparative Religion and that it will make an epoch 
in the investigation of Oriental Religion." 



standard Books on Buddhism 



WRITTEN BY GREAT BUDDHIST AUTHORS 

Translated from the Chinese by TIMOTHY RICHARD 

New Testament of Higher Buddhism $5.00 

Contains translations of two of the most important books of 
Higher Buddhism, viz. The Awakening of Faith £ 'g fg and 
Essence of the Lotus Gospel ^5?p^. These books have much in 
common with Christianity such as beUef in God, in salvation by 
faith, in a mighty Saviour, and in repentance and new life com- 
ing from the Holy Spirit, and are totally different in their funda- 
mental principles from Primitive Buddliism with its doctrine of 
endless rebirths, self-sufficiency without God, etc 

" Tile trauslatiou is iaithiui and touveys ihe spirit as well as ihe letter of 
the BuddQlst texts."— " Pift^- Takakusu, tlie higliest Sanscrit and JJuMhist 
author iti/ in Japan ,„, „ ^^^. , , ^ ,. 

'•I'ne JSew Xestament of Higher Buddhism is a perfect revelation — a mar- 
veUous evidence of a louch with the great Kevelation that came througu 
Judea. It is a beautiful expression oi the higuest Christian love toward 
these Oriental fellow-traveilej.^ to eiBrniiy."— ^ leading Korean missionary. 
"Botn Jjr. Kicuara and Mr. J-ilayd(oi Japan>are of opinion that lUahayaua 
BuddhiSin contains teachings which are iuentical with or similar to teach- 
ings whicn arc regardea <.s essential to Christianity."— i(7i£ Que«(. 

Goidc to Baddhahood jl^w $2.00 

A translation of the vvorii. Hsuau Fo P'u, in which Primitive aud 
Higher Buddhijim, tliough irreconcilable, are harmouized as Jar 
as possible in a regular order, beginning with the lowest scale of 
existence and assending through the different stages till Huaily 
Paradiise and Buddhahood are attained. This book sliows the 
urgent need ot Buddhists getting more knowledge on the differ- 
ence between Primitive and Higher Buddhism from enlightened 
missionaries. 

A Mission to Heaven SJ^IE, with so original illustrations $6.00 
This id a Chinese Kpic and Allegory of Higher Buddhism by one 
who appears to be a liberal .Nestorian Christian. It is one of the 
world's great masterpieces of literature and must be classed with 
the Epics of Homer, Dante, and Milton, and Bunyan'a "Pilgrim's 
Progress." It is a splendid schoolmaster to Christ the Light of 
the World. In fact it is impossible to deal fairly with Buddhism 
without knowledge of Higher Buddhism, and the gain to the mis- 
sionary influence from this knowledge in incomparable. 
In these translations of standard Buddhist books the reader can 
judge of their missionary value for himself. 



8ool(S bvj Timoth\? Hichard 



Conversion by the Million, 2 vols. S5.00 

"The title is certainly startling, and in the body of the 
book will be found things almost more startling still. 
Among the visions the author cherishes are those of 
universal abolition of Poverty, Ignorance, War, and 
Devilry. He can count literally by the million the 
educated Chinese who within recent years have at least 
been converted to a large part of the programme of re- 
form which he would fain see adopted by the nation as 
a whole." — Professor of History in New College, Edinburgh. 

Historical Evidences of Christianity Cap. 8vo. 208 pp. ... $0.75 
An English version of the author's well-known work in 
Chinese, Benefits of Christianity ^ 1& ^ S, now in 
sixth edition. A history of how the world has bene- 
fitted materially, socially, intellectually, politically, 
morally, and spiritually through the spread of the Gospel. 

Calendar of the Gods in China, Svo. 47 pp. Paper Cover ... S0.50 
A Chinese religious calendar with an introduction 
dealing with Idolatry and ancient forces of Nature, 
Monotheism, and Modern Forces of Nature, some of 
the leading gods, etc. 

Ctlinese Mtisic, by Mrs. Eichard. Svo. 44 pp. Paper Cover ... $0.50 
Deals with the history of Chinese Music, Chinese nota- 
tion, time, harmony, instruments, orchestras, etc. 
Illustrated. 
The same author has in Chinese forty-five different 

works. (See Catalogue of the C. L. S.) 



Sold at th^ C. h. S. 5ool< Depot 

^4^ Honan Road, Shanghai 



